
BHAGAVAD-GITA in ENGLISH
Author: Sage Veda Vyasa
Translated in English: Ramananda Prasad, Ph.D.

INTRODUCTION
The Bhagavad-Gita is a doctrine of universal truth and a book 
of moral and spiritual growth. Its message is sublime and non-sectarian. It deals with the most sacred metaphysical science. It imparts the knowledge of the Self and answers two universal questions: Who am I, and how can I lead a happy and peaceful life in 
this word full of dualities and dilemmas?
It's a timeless book of wisdom that inspired Thoreau, Emerson, 
Einstein, Oppenheimer, Gandhi and many others. The BhagavadGita teaches us how to equip ourselves for the battle of life. A repeated study with faith purifies our psyche and guides us to face 
the challenges of modern living leading to inner peace and happiness.
Gita teaches the spiritual science of Self-realization (SR) based 
on the essence of Upanishads and Vedanta. The prime message 
of the Gita is: The ultimate purpose of life is to realize one’s essential nature and become one with the Supreme Self within all of us. 
It assures spiritual progress for all humans, and how to be one with 
the Supreme. Its teachings are profound, universal, uplifting, and 
sublime. 
The ignorance of metaphysical or Spiritual knowledge—not 
knowing our real identity—is humanity’s greatest predicament. It is 
said that there is no human mind that cannot be purified by a repeated study of the Gita. Gita explains the basic principles of spiritual science— using Sanskrit poetry— in a very clear and inspiring 
manner. Sacred relationship between the Creator and the creation
is well established in the Gita. If one lives in the spirit of even a few 
verses of the Gita, one’s life will be transformed into divinity. 
The philosophy of duty, devotion and Self-knowledge is wonderfully synthesized and harmonized in the Gita—without creating 
any conflict among them—to give the reader eternal bliss, everlasting peace and perennial joy in life. It awakens Cosmic Consciousness and stimulates life with spirituality. Religion tends to create a 
wall of division and conflicts along religious lines. Whereas, spirituality unites people by breaking those walls. A spiritual person is a 
friend of all and a foe of none, because he considers all creatures—living or non-living—as part and parcel of the Cosmic body 
of the Absolute, the Source.
The message of the Gita came to humanity due to Arjuna’s 
unwillingness to do his duty as a warrior, because fighting involved 
destruction and killing. Nonviolence or Ahinsa is one of the most 
fundamental tenets of spiritual culture. All lives, human or non-human, are sacred. This immortal discourse between the Supreme 
Lord, Krishna, and His devotee-friend, Arjuna, occurs not in a temple, a secluded forest, or on a mountain top; but on a battlefield on 
the eve of a big war. Anyone can be helped by practice of only a few of 
its teachings. No change of one’s faith or life-style is needed!
A total of seven hundred (700) verses of the Gita, in 18 chapters, are recorded in world’s longest epic, Mahabharata, having 
over 100,000 verses in Sanskrit poetry. In Gita Lord Krishna advises Arjuna to get up and fight. This may create a misunderstanding of the principles of non-violence if the background of the war of 
Mahabharata is not kept in mind. Therefore, a brief historical description is in order.
In ancient times there was a king who had two sons, Dhritarashtra and Pandu. The former was born blind; therefore, Pandu 
inherited the kingdom. Pandu had five sons. They were called the 
Pandavas. Dhritarashtra had one hundred sons. They were called 
the Kauravas. Duryodhana was the eldest of the Kauravas. 
After the death of king Pandu, the eldest son of Pandu became 
the lawful King. Duryodhana was a very jealous person. He also 
wanted the kingdom. The kingdom was divided into two halves between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. Duryodhana was not satisfied with his share of the kingdom. He wanted the entire kingdom 
for himself. He unsuccessfully planned several foul plays to kill the 
Pandavas and take away their kingdom also. He unlawfully took 
possession of the entire kingdom of the Pandavas and refused to 
give back even an acre of land without a war. All mediation by Lord 
Krishna and others failed. The big war of Mahabharata was thus 
inevitable. The Pandavas were unwilling participants. They had 


only two choices: Fight for their right as a matter of duty or run 
away from war and accept defeat for the sake of peace and nonviolence. Arjuna, one of the five Pandava brothers, faced this dilemma in the battlefield: 

Whether to fight or run away from war for 
peace.
Arjuna’s dilemma is, in reality, the Universal Dilemma. All human beings face dilemmas, big or small, in their everyday life while
performing their duties. Arjuna’s dilemma was a big one. He had to 
make a choice between fighting the war and killing his 

most 
revered guru who was on the other side, very dear friends, close 
relatives, and many innocent warriors; or running away from the 

battlefield for the sake of preserving peace and nonviolence. The 
entire seven hundred verses of the Bhagavad-Gita are a discourse 
between Lord Krishna and the confused Arjuna on the battlefield 
near New Delhi, India, in 3,139 BCE. This discourse was narrated
to the blind king, Dhritarashtra, by his charioteer, Sanjaya, as an 
eyewitness war report.
The word ‘Bhagavad’ means the Supreme Being, God or Bhagavan in Sanskrit. ‘Gita’ means song. Thus, Bhagavad-Gita means 
the Song of God or The Celestial Song, because it was sung by 
Bhagavan Lord Krishna, an incarnation of God Himself. 
CHAPTER 1
1. Arjuna’s Dilemma
The blind King inquired from his charioteer: O Sanjaya, tell me 
in detail, what did my sons and the Pandavas do in the battlefield 
before the war started? (1.01)
Chapter Summary
Sanjaya said: Arjuna asked his charioteer-friend, Lord Krishna, 
to drive his chariot between the two armies so that he could see 
the armies on both sides. Arjuna felt great compassion to see his 
friends and relatives on the opposite side, whom he must kill to win 
this war. He became confused, spoke of the evils of war, and refused to fight or do his duty as a warrior. 
Arjuna sat down on the back seat of the chariot with his mind 
overwhelmed with sorrow. (Verse 1.47)
NOTE: Some non-essential verses from Chapters 1 and 2 only 
have been omitted for ease of understanding the teachings of the 
Gita by the first time readers.
CHAPTER 2
2. Spiritual knowledge
Sanjaya said: Lord Krishna spoke these words to Arjuna whose 
eyes were tearful and downcast, and who was overwhelmed with 
compassion and despair. (2.01) O King, Lord Krishna, as if smiling, 
spoke these words to distressed Arjuna in the midst of the two armies. (2.10) 
Teachings of the Gita begins 
Important verses are highlighted. First time readers should 
read and understand these verses first.
The Supreme Lord said: You grieve for those who are not worthy of grief; and yet speak words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead. (2.11) There was never a time 
when these monarchs, you, or I did not exist, nor shall we ever 
cease to exist in the future. (2.12) Just as a living being acquires a 
childhood body, a youth body, and an old-age body during this life; 
similarly, it acquires another new body after death. The wise are 
not deluded by this. (2.13) The contacts of the senses with the 
sense objects give rise to the feelings of heat and cold, pain and 
pleasure. They are transitory and impermanent. Therefore, learn 
to endure them, O Arjuna, (2.14) because a calm person — who is 
not afflicted by these sense objects, and is steady in pain and 
pleasure — becomes fit for immortality, O Arjuna. (2.15) 
The spirit is eternal, body is transitory
The invisible Spirit is eternal, and the visible world, including 
the physical body, is transitory. The reality of these two is indeed 
certainly seen by the seers of Truth. (2.16) The Spirit by which all 
this universe is pervaded is indestructible. No one can destroy the 
imperishable Spirit. (2.17) Bodies of the eternal, immutable, and 
incomprehensible Spirit are perishable. Therefore, fight, O Arjuna. 
(2.18) One who thinks that Spirit is a slayer, and one who thinks 
Spirit is slain, are both ignorant. Because Spirit neither slays nor is 
slain. (2.19) The Spirit is neither born nor does it die at any time. It 
does not come into being, or cease to exist. It is unborn, eternal, 
permanent, and primeval. The Spirit is not destroyed when the 
body is destroyed. (2.20) O Arjuna, how can a person who knows 
that the Spirit is indestructible, eternal, unborn, and immutable, kill 
anyone or cause anyone to be killed? (2.21)
Death and Reincarnation of the soul
Just as a person puts on new garments after discarding the old 
ones; similarly, the living entity acquires new bodies after casting 
away the old bodies. (2.22) Weapons do not cut this Spirit, fire 
does not burn it, water does not make it wet, and the wind does not 
make it dry. Spirit cannot be cut, burned, wet, or dried. It is eternal, 


all-pervading, unchanging, immovable, and primeval. (2.23-24) 
The Spirit is said to be unexplainable, incomprehensible, and unchanging. Knowing this Spirit as such, you should not grieve. (2.25)
Even if you think that this living being takes birth and dies perpetually, even then, O Arjuna, you should not grieve like this. Because, death is certain for one who is born, and birth is certain for 
one who dies; and the cycle of birth-death continues. Therefore, 
you should not lament over the inevitable. (2.26-27) All beings, O 
Arjuna, are unmanifest — invisible to our physical eyes — before 
birth and after death. They manifest between the birth and the 
death only. What is there to grieve about? (2.28) Some look upon 

this Spirit as a wonder, another describes it as wonderful, and others hear of it as a wonder. Even after hearing about it very few 
people know it. (2.29) O Arjuna, the Spirit that dwells in the body 
of all beings is eternally indestructible. Therefore, you should not 
mourn for anybody. (2.30) 
Duty of a warrior
Considering also your duty as a warrior, you should not waver. 
Because there is nothing more auspicious for a warrior than a righteous war. (2.31) Only the fortunate warriors, O Arjuna, get such an 
opportunity for a righteous war against evil that is like an open door 
to heaven. (2.32)
Commentary
The righteous war is not a religious war against the 
followers of other religions. The righteous war may be waged 
even against our own evil-doer kith and kin (RigVeda
6.75.19). Life is a continuous battle between the forces of evil 
and goodness. “Whosoever kills an innocent human being, it shall 
be regarded as if he has killed the entire humanity.” (Surah 5.32). 
It is better to die for a right cause and acquire the grace of 
sacrifice than to die an ordinary but compulsory death. The gates 
of heaven open wide for those who stand up to vindicate justice 
and righteousness (Dharma). Not to oppose an evil is to indirectly 
support it. Very similar ideas are expressed in other scriptures of 
the world. The Bible says: Happy are those who suffer persecution 
because they do what God requires. The kingdom of heaven 
belongs to them (MATTHEW 5.10). There is no sin in killing an 
aggressor. Whosoever helps and supports an aggressor is also an 
aggressor. Thus, all those who supported Kauravas were basically 
aggressors and deserved to be eliminated.
If you will not fight this righteous war, then you will fail in your 
duty, lose your reputation, and incur sin. (2.33) People will talk 
about your disgrace forever. To the honored, dishonor is worse 
than death. (2.34) The great warriors will think that you have retreated from the battle out of fear. Those who have greatly esteemed you will lose respect for you. (2.35) Your enemies will 
speak many unmentionable words and scorn your ability. What 
could be more painful to you than this? (2.36) You will go to heaven 
if killed in the line of duty, or you will enjoy the kingdom on the earth 
if victorious. Therefore, get up with a determination to fight, O Arjuna. (2.37) Treating pleasure and pain, gain and loss, and victory 
and defeat alike, engage yourself in your duty. By doing your duty 
this way, you will not incur sin. (2.38) 
Importance of Karma-yoga, the selfless action
The wisdom of spiritual knowledge has been imparted to you, 
O Arjuna. Now listen to the wisdom of Karma-yoga, the selfless 
service (Seva), endowed with which you will free yourself from the 
bondage or reactions of action (Karma). (2.39) In Karma-yoga, no 
effort is ever lost and there is no adverse effect. Even a little practice of this discipline protects one from the great fear of birth and 
death. (2.40) A Karma-yogi has a resolute determination for Godrealization, O Arjuna, but the desires of one who works to enjoy the 
fruits of work are endless. (2.41) 
Material and spiritual aspects of life
The misguided ones who delight in the melodious chanting of 
the Vedas or any scripture — without understanding its real purpose — think, O Arjuna, as if there is nothing else in it except the 
rituals for the sole purpose of obtaining heavenly enjoyment. (2.42) 
They are dominated by material desires and consider the attainment of heaven as the highest goal of life. They engage in specific 
rites for the sake of prosperity and enjoyment. Rebirth is the result 
of their action. (2.43) The resolute determination of Self-realization 
is not formed in the minds of those who are attached to pleasure 
and power and whose judgment is obscured by such ritualistic activities. (2.44) A portion of the Vedas deals with three modes or 
states of the material Nature. Become free from pairs of opposites; 
be ever balanced and unconcerned with the thoughts of acquisition 
and preservation. Rise above the three states, and be Self-conscious, O Arjuna. (2.45) To a Self-realized person, scriptures are 
as useful as a small reservoir of water when the water of a huge 
lake becomes available. (2.46) 
Theory and practice of Karma-yoga
You have control over your respective duty only, but no control 
or claim over the results. The fruits of work should not be your only 
motive and you should never be inactive. (2.47) Do your duty to 
the best of your ability, O Arjuna, with your mind attached to the 
Lord, abandoning worry and attachment to the results, and remaining calm in both success and failure. The calmness of mind is 
called Karma-yoga. (2.48) Work done with selfish motives is inferior by far to selfless service or Karma-yoga. Therefore, be a 
Karma-yogi, O Arjuna. Those who work only to enjoy the fruits of 
their labor are, in truth, unhappy. Because, one has no control over 


the results. (2.49) 
A true Karma-yogi becomes free from both vice and virtue in 
this very life. Therefore, strive for Karma-yoga. Working to the best 
of one’s abilities without becoming attached to the fruits of work is 
called Karma-yoga. (2.50) Wise Karma-yogis are freed from the 
bondage of rebirth by renouncing attachment to the fruits of all 
work and attain a blissful divine state. (2.51) When your intellect 
completely pierces the veil of confusion, then you will become indifferent to what has been heard and what is to be heard from the 
scriptures. (2.52) 

When your intellect, that is confused by the conflicting opinions 
and the ritualistic doctrine of the Vedas, shall stay steady and firm 
on concentrating on the Supreme Being, then you shall attain union 
with the Supreme Being in trance. (2.53) Arjuna said: O Krishna, 
what are the marks of an enlightened person whose intellect is
steady? How does a person of steady intellect speak? How does 
such a person sit and walk? (2.54) 
Marks of a Self-realized person
The Supreme Lord said: When one is completely free from all 
desires of the mind and is satisfied with the Eternal Being (God) by 
the joy of Eternal Being, then one is called an enlightened person, 
O Arjuna. (2.55) A person whose mind is unperturbed by sorrow, 
who does not crave pleasures — and who is completely free from 
attachment, fear, and anger— is called a sage of steady mind. 
(2.56) Those who are not attached to anything, who are neither 
elated by getting desired results, nor troubled by undesired results, 
their intellect is considered steady. (2.57) When one can completely withdraw the senses from its sense objects— as a tortoise 
withdraws its limbs into the shell for protection from dangers— then 
the intellect of such a person is considered steady. (2.58) The desire for sensual pleasures fades away if one abstains from sense 
enjoyment, but the craving for sense enjoyment remains. The craving also disappears from one who has known the Supreme Being. 
(2.59) 
Dangers of unrestrained senses
Restless senses, O Arjuna, forcibly carry away the mind of 
even a wise person striving for perfection. (2.60) One should fix 
one’s mind on Me with loving contemplation after bringing the 
senses under control. One’s intellect becomes steady when one’s 
senses are under complete control. (2.61) One develops attachment to sense objects by thinking about sense objects. Desire for 
sense objects comes from attachment to sense objects, and anger 
comes from unfulfilled desires. (2.62) Delusion or wild ideas arise 
from anger. The mind is bewildered by delusion. Reasoning is destroyed when the mind is bewildered. One falls from the right path 
when reasoning is destroyed. (2.63)
Peace through sense control and Self-knowledge
A disciplined person, enjoying sense objects with senses that 
are under control and free from likes and dislikes, attains tranquility. (2.64) All sorrows are destroyed upon attainment of tranquility. 
The intellect of such a tranquil person soon becomes completely 
steady and united with the Source. (2.65) There is neither Selfknowledge nor Self-perception to those who are not united with the 
Eternal Being. Without Self-perception there is no peace, and without peace there can be no happiness. (2.66) 
The mind, when controlled by roving senses, steals away the 
intellect as a storm takes away a boat on the sea from its destination — the spiritual shore. (2.67) Therefore, O Arjuna, one’s intellect becomes steady when the senses are completely withdrawn 
from its sense objects. (2.68) A yogi, the person of self-restraint, 
remains wakeful when it is night for all others. It is night for a yogi 
who sees when all others are wakeful. (2.69)
NOTE: What is considered real by a yogi is of no value for 
a worldly person and vice-versa.
One attains peace when all desires dissipate within the mind 
without creating any mental disturbance, just as river waters enter 
the full ocean without creating any disturbance. One who desires 
material objects is never peaceful. (2.70) One who abandons all 
desires, and becomes free from longing and the feeling of “i” and 
“my”, attains peace. (2.71) O Arjuna, this is the superconscious 
state of mind. Attaining this state, one is no longer deluded. Gaining this state, even at the end of one’s life, a person attains Nirvana 
(or becomes one with the Absolute). (2.72)
CHAPTER 3
3. Path of Selfless service, Karma-yoga
Arjuna said: If You consider acquiring spiritual knowledge is 
better than working, then why do You want me to engage in this 
horrible war, O Krishna? You seem to confuse my mind by apparently conflicting words. Tell me, decisively, one thing by which I 
may attain the Supreme. (3.01-02) The Supreme Lord said: In this 
world, O Arjuna, a twofold path of spiritual discipline has been 
stated by Me in the past — the path of Self-knowledge for the contemplative, introverts and the path of unselfish work (Seva, Karmayoga) for all others. (3.03) One does not attain freedom from the 
bondage of Karma by merely abstaining from work. No one attains 
perfection by merely giving up work. (3.04) Because no one can 
remain actionless even for a moment, everyone is driven to action 
— helplessly indeed — by the forces of nature. (3.05) The deluded 
ones, who restrain their organs of action but mentally dwell upon 


the sense enjoyment, are called hypocrites. (3.06) 
Why one should serve others?
One who controls the senses by a trained and purified mind 
and intellect, and engages the organs of action to selfless service, 
is superior, O Arjuna. (3.07) Perform your obligatory duty because 
working is indeed better than sitting idle. Even the maintenance of 
your body would be impossible without work. (3.08) Human beings 
are bound by work that is not performed as a selfless service. 
Therefore, O Arjuna, becoming free from attachment to the fruits 
of work, do your duty efficiently as a service to Me. (3.09) 

The first commandment of the creator
Brahma, the creator, in the beginning created human beings 
together with selfless service (Seva, sacrifice) and said: By Seva
or sacrifice of self-interest you shall prosper, and Seva shall fulfill 
all your desires. (3.10) Help the celestial controllers (Devas) with selfless service and they will help you. Thus helping each other, you shall 
attain the Supreme goal of human life. (3.11) The celestial controllers, pleased by selfless service, will give you desired objects even 
without asking for it. One who enjoys the gift of celestials without 
offering them anything in return is, indeed, a thief. (3.12) The righteous who eat the remnants of selfless service are freed from all 
sins, but the impious who cook food only for themselves (without 
first offering to Me, or sharing with others), in truth, eat sin (3.13). 
The physical body of living beings is made up of and sustained by 
food; food is created by God from five basic elements. God is 
pleased by the sacrifice (Qurbani) of self-interest: The selfless philanthropic work, and blesses selfless persons. Selfless work or sacrifice is our duty. Duty is prescribed in the scriptures. The scriptures
come from God. Thus, the all-pervading God is ever present in 
selfless service, Seva. (3.14-15) One who does not help to keep 
the wheel of creation in motion by sacrificial duty and who rejoices 
sense pleasures only, that sinful person lives in vain, O Arjuna. 
(3.16) For a Self-realized person, who rejoices only with God, who 
is delighted with God and who is content with God, there is no duty. 
(3.17) Such a person has no interest, whatsoever, in what is done 
or what is not done. A Self-realized person does not depend on 
anybody, except God, for anything. (3.18) 
Leaders should set an example
Therefore, always perform your duty efficiently and without any 
attachment to the results, because by doing work without attachment one attains the Supreme Being. (3.19) King Janaka and others attained perfection (or Self-realization) by selfless service 
(Karma-yoga) alone. You should also perform your duty with a view 
to guide people, and for universal welfare of the society. (3.20) 
Whatever noble persons do, others follow. Whatever standard they 
set up, the world follows. (3.21) O Arjuna, there is nothing in the 
three worlds (heaven, earth, and the lower regions) that should be 
done by Me, nor there is anything that I should obtain, yet I engage 
in action. (3.22) If I do not engage in action relentlessly, O Arjuna, 
people would follow My path. These worlds would perish if I do not 
work, and I would be the cause of confusion and destruction of all 
these people. (3.23-24) As the ignorant work, O Arjuna, with attachment to the fruits of work, so the wise should work without attachment, for the welfare of the society. (3.25) The wise should not 
unsettle the minds of the ignorant, who are attached to the fruits of 
work, but should inspire others by performing all works, efficiently,
without attachment to results. (3.26) 
All works are the works of Nature
All work is done by the energy and power of nature, but due to 
delusion of ignorance, people assume themselves to be the doer
and thus incur sin or Karmic bondage. (3.27) One who knows the 
truth, O Arjuna, about the role of the forces of nature and work, 
does not become attached to work, knowing very well that it’s the 
forces of nature that work with their instruments — our organs. 
(3.28) Those who are deluded by the illusive power (Maya) of Nature become attached to the work done by the forces of nature. 
The wise should not disturb the mind of the ignorant whose 
knowledge is imperfect. (3.29) Do your duty — dedicating all work 
to Me — in a spiritual frame of mind, free from desire, attachment, 
and mental grief. (3.30) Those who always practice this teaching 
of Mine — with faith, sincerity and free from complain — are freed 
from the bondage of Karma. But those who carp at My teaching 
and do not practice it, should be considered ignorant of all 
knowledge, senseless, and lost. (3.31-32) All beings follow their 
nature. Even the wise act according to their own nature. What, 
then, is the value of sense restraint? (3.33)
Two stumbling blocks on the path 
Likes and dislikes for sense objects remain in the senses. One 
should not come under the control of these two, because they are, 
indeed, two major stumbling blocks on one’s path of Self-realization. (3.34) One’s inferior natural work is better than superior unnatural work. Death in carrying out one’s natural work is useful. 
Unnatural work produces too much stress. (3.35) 
Lust is the origin of sin
Arjuna said: O Krishna, what impels one to commit sin as if 
unwillingly and forced against one’s will? (3.36) The Supreme Lord 
said: It is lust (or intense desire for material and sensual pleasures), born out of passion, that becomes anger when unfulfilled. 
Lust is insatiable and is a great devil. Know this as the enemy. 
(3.37) As the fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror by dust, and as 


an embryo by the amnion, similarly Self-knowledge becomes obscured by lust. (3.38) O Arjuna, Self-knowledge becomes covered 
by this insatiable fire of lust, the eternal enemy of the wise. (3.39) 
The senses, the mind, and the intellect are said to be the seat of 
lust. Lust — by controlling the senses, the mind, and the intellect 
— deludes a person by veiling Self-knowledge. (3.40) Therefore, 
O Arjuna, by controlling the senses first, kill this devil of material 
desire that destroys Self-knowledge and Self-realization. (3.41) 
How to control lust
The senses are said to be superior to the body; the mind is 
superior to the senses; the intellect is superior to the mind; and 

Spirit is superior to the intellect. (3.42) Thus, knowing the Spirit to 
be superior to the intellect, and controlling the mind by the intellect 
that is purified by spiritual practices, one must kill this mighty enemy, lust, O Arjuna. (3.43)
CHAPTER 4
4. Path of renunciation with Self-knowledge
Karma-yoga is an ancient law 
The Supreme Lord said: I taught this Karma-yoga, the eternal 
science of selfless action, to King Vivasvan. Vivasvan taught it to 
Manu. Manu taught it to Ikshvaku. Thus handed down in succession the saintly Kings knew this. After a long time the science of 
Karma-yoga was lost from this earth. Today I have described the 
same ancient science to you because you are my sincere devotee 
and friend. Karma-yoga is the supreme secret indeed. (4.01-03) 
Arjuna said: You were born later, but Vivasvan was born in ancient 
time. How am I to understand that You taught this Karma-yoga in 
the beginning of the creation? (4.04)
The purpose of incarnation of God
The Supreme Lord said: Both you and I have taken many 
births. I remember them all, O Arjuna, but you do not remember. 
(4.05) Though I am eternal, immutable, and the Lord of all beings, 
yet I manifest myself by controlling My own material Nature, using 
My divine potential energy (Maya). (4.06) Whenever there is a decline of Dharma (Righteousness) and a predominance of Adharma 
(or Unrighteousness), O Arjuna, then I manifest Myself. I appear 
from time to time for protecting the good, for transforming the 
wicked, and for establishing world order (Dharma). (4.07-08) The 
one who truly understands My transcendental appearance and activities of creation, maintenance, and dissolution, attains My supreme abode and is not born again after leaving this body, O Arjuna. (4.09) Many have become free from attachment, fear, anger, 
and attained salvation by taking refuge in Me, becoming fully absorbed in My thoughts, and becoming purified by the fire of Selfknowledge. (4.10) 
Path of worship and prayer
With whatever motive people worship Me, I fulfill their desires 
accordingly. People worship Me with different motives. (4.11) 
Those who long for success in their work here on the earth worship 
the celestial controllers. Success in work comes quickly in this human world. (4.12) The four divisions — based on aptitude and vocation — of human society were created by Me. Though I am the 
author of this system of the division of labor, one should know that 
I do nothing and I am eternal. (4.13) Work or Karma does not bind 
Me, because I have no desire for the fruits of work. The one who 
fully understands and practices this truth is also not bound by 
Karma. (4.14) The ancient seekers of liberation also performed 
their duties with this understanding. Therefore, you should do your 
duty as the ancients did. (4.15)
Attached, detached, and forbidden action
Even the wise ones are confused about what is action and what 
is inaction. Therefore, I shall clearly explain what is action, knowing 
that one shall be liberated from the evil of birth and death. (4.16) 
The true nature of action is very difficult to understand. Therefore, 
one should know the nature of attached or selfish action, the nature 
of detached or selfless action, and also the nature of forbidden action. (4.17) 
A Karma-yogi is not subject to the Karmic laws
The one who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is 
a wise person. Such a person is a yogi and has accomplished everything. (4.18) 
To see inaction in action and vice versa is to understand that 
the Lord does all the work indirectly through His power by using us. 
He is the inactive actor. We are actively inactive, because we cannot do anything without the flow of His power. Therefore, we are 
not the doer, just an instrument in His hands.
A person, whose desires have become selfless by being 
roasted in the fire of Self-knowledge, is called a sage by the wise. 
(4.19) The one who has abandoned attachment to the fruits of 
work, and remains ever content and dependent on no one but God, 
such a person — though engaged in activity — does nothing at all 
and incurs no Karmic reaction, good or bad. (4.20) The one who is 
free from desires, whose mind and senses are under control, and 
who has renounced all proprietorship, does not incur sin — the 
Karmic reaction — by doing bodily action. (4.21) Content with 


whatever gain comes naturally by His will, unaffected by pairs of 
opposites, free from envy, calm in success and failure, though engaged in work, such a Karma-yogi is not bound by Karma. (4.22) 
The one who is free from attachment, whose mind is fixed in Selfknowledge, who does work as a service (Seva) to the Lord, all Karmic bonds of such a philanthropic person (Karma-yogi) dissolve 
away. (4.23) God shall be realized by the one who considers everything as a manifestation or an act of God. (Also see 9.16) (4.24) 
Different types of spiritual practices 
Some yogis perform the service of worship to celestial controllers (Devas, guardian angels), while others study scriptures for 
Self-knowledge. Some restrain their senses and give up their sensual pleasures. Others perform breathing and other yogic exercises. Some give charity and offer their wealth as a sacrifice. (4.25-

28) Those who are engaged in yogic practices, reach the breathless state of trance (Samadhi) by offering inhalation into exhalation 
and exhalation into inhalation as a sacrifice using yogic techniques. 
(4.29) Others restrict their diet and offer their inhalations as sacrifice into their inhalations. All these people are the knowers of sacrifice, and are purified by their sacrifice. (4.30) Those who perform 
selfless service obtain the nectar of Self-knowledge as a result of 
their sacrifice and attain the Eternal Being. O Arjuna, even this 
world is not a happy place for the non-sacrificer, how can the other 
world be? (4.31) Many types of spiritual disciplines are described 
in the Vedas. Know them all to be born from Karma or the action 
of body, mind, and senses. Knowing this, you shall attain Nirvana. 
(4.32) 
A superior spiritual practice
The acquisition and propagation of Self-knowledge are superior to any material gain or gift, O Arjuna. Because all actions in 
their entirety culminate in knowledge. (4.33) Acquire this spiritual
knowledge from a Self-realized guru by humble reverence, by sincere inquiry, and by service. The wise ones who have realized the 
Truth will teach you. (4.34) After knowing the Truth, O Arjuna, you 
shall not again become deluded like this. By this knowledge you 
shall behold the entire creation first within Me, the Supreme Being, 
then within your own higher self and then see Me alone in everything. (4.35) Even if one is the most sinful of all sinners, one shall 
yet cross over the ocean of sin by the raft of Self-knowledge. (4.36) 
As the blazing fire reduces wood to ashes; similarly, the fire of Selfknowledge reduces all bonds of Karma (or sin) to ashes, O Arjuna. 
(4.37)
Spiritual knowledge is revealed to a Karma-yogi
In truth, there is no purifier in this world like the true knowledge 
of the Supreme Being. One who becomes purified by Karma-yoga
discovers this knowledge within, naturally, in due course of time. 
(4.38) The one who has faith and is sincere in yogic practices and 
has control over the senses, gains this spiritual knowledge. Having 
gained this knowledge, one at once attains supreme peace. (4.39) 
The irrational, the faithless, and the atheist perish. There is neither 
this world, nor the world beyond, nor happiness for the disbeliever. 
(4.40)
Knowledge, Karma-yoga are needed for Nirvana
Work (Karma) does not bind a person who has renounced work 
by renouncing attachment to the fruits of work, and whose doubts 
about the Self are completely destroyed by Self-knowledge, O Arjuna. (4.41) Therefore, cut the ignorance-born doubt about the Supreme Being abiding in your mind by the sword of Self-knowledge, 
resort to Karma-yoga, and get up for the war, O Arjuna. (4.42) 
CHAPTER 5
5. Path of renunciation
Arjuna said: O Krishna, You praise spiritual knowledge and 
also performance of selfless service. Tell me, definitely, which one 
is the better of the two. (5.01) The Supreme Lord said: The path of 
Self-knowledge and the path of selfless service both lead to the 
supreme goal. But, of the two, selfless service is superior to Selfknowledge. (5.02) A person should be considered a true Samnyasi 
(renunciant) who neither likes nor dislikes. One is easily liberated 
from Karmic bondage by becoming free from the pairs of opposites, O Arjuna. (5.03) 
Both paths lead to the Supreme
The ignorant — not the wise — consider the path of Selfknowledge (or renunciation) and the path of selfless service 
(Karma-yoga) as different from each other. The person who has 
truly mastered one, gets the benefits of both. (5.04) Whatever goal 
a Samnyasi reaches, a Karma-yogi also reaches the same goal. 
Therefore, the one who sees the path of renunciation and the path 
of unselfish work as the same, really sees. (5.05) But, true renunciation, O Arjuna, is difficult to attain without Karma-yoga. A sage 
equipped with Karma-yoga quickly attains God. (5.06) A Karmayogi whose mind is pure, whose mind and senses are under control, and who sees one and the same Eternal Being in all beings, 
is not bound by Karma though intensely engaged in work. (5.07) 
A Karma-yogi works for God only
The wise (or Samnyasi) who knows the truth thinks: "I do nothing at all". In seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, walking, 
sleeping, breathing; and speaking, giving, taking, as well as opening and closing the eyes, a Samnyasi believes that only the senses 
are operating upon their objects. (5.08-09) One who does all work 
as an offering to the Lord — abandoning attachment to the results 
— remains untouched by Karmic reaction or sin as a lotus leaf 
never gets wet by water, while living in it. (5.10) The Karma-yogis 
perform action —without attachment — with their body, mind, intellect, and senses only for self-purification. (5.11) A Karma-yogi


attains Supreme Bliss by abandoning attachment to the fruits of 
work; while others, who are attached to the fruits of work, become 
bound by selfish work. (5.12)
The path of Self-knowledge
A person who has completely renounced attachment to the 
fruits of all works, lives happily, neither performing nor directing any 
action. (5.13) The Lord neither creates the urge for action, nor the 
feeling of doership, nor the attachment to the results of action in 
people. All these are done by the powers of Nature. (5.14) The 
Lord does not take the responsibility for the good or evil deeds of 

anybody. The Self-knowledge becomes covered by the veil of ignorance; thereby people become deluded and do evil deeds. (5.15) 
Spiritual knowledge destroys the ignorance of the Self and reveals 
the Supreme, just as the Sun reveals the beauty of objects of the 
world. (5.16) Persons whose mind and intellect are totally merged 
with the Source, who are firmly devoted to the Source, who have 
the Source as their supreme goal and sole refuge, and whose impurities are destroyed by the knowledge of the Source, do not take 
birth again. (5.17) 
Additional marks of an enlightened person
An enlightened person — by perceiving the Lord in all — looks 
at a learned and humble priest, an outcast, even a cow, an elephant, or a dog with an equal eye. (5.18) Everything has been accomplished in this very life by the one whose mind is set in equality. 
Such a person has realized God, because God is flawless and impartial. (5.19) One who neither rejoices on obtaining what is pleasant, nor grieves on obtaining the unpleasant, who has a steady 
mind, who is undeluded, and who is a knower of the Supreme Being, such a person eternally abides with the Supreme Being. (5.20) 
Such a person who is in union with the Supreme Being becomes 
unattached to sensual pleasures by discovering the joy of the Self 
through contemplation, and enjoys spiritual bliss. (5.21) Sensual 
pleasures are, in truth, the source of misery, and have a beginning 
and an end. Therefore, the wise do not rejoice sensual pleasures. 
(5.22) One who is able to withstand the impulse of lust and anger 
before death is a yogi, and a happy person. (5.23) One who finds 
happiness with the Eternal Being, who rejoices Eternal Being 
within, and who is illuminated by Self-knowledge; such a yogi attains Nirvana, and goes to Eternal Being. (5.24) Seers whose sins 
(or imperfections) are destroyed, whose doubts have been dispelled by Self-knowledge, whose minds are disciplined, and who 
are engaged in the welfare of all beings, attain the Supreme Being. 
(5.25) They, who are free from lust and anger, who have subdued 
the mind and senses, and who have known the Self, easily attain 
Nirvana. (5.26)
Path of meditation and contemplation
A sage is liberated by renouncing all material enjoyments, focusing the eyes and the mind between the eye-brows, equalizing 
the breath moving through the nostrils by using yogic techniques, 
keeping the senses, mind, and intellect under control, having salvation as the prime goal, and by becoming free from lust, anger, 
greed and fear. (5.27-28) My devotee attains peace by knowing 
Me, the Supreme Being as the enjoyer of sacrifices and austerities, 
as the great Lord of all the universe, and the friend of all beings. 
(5.29) 
CHAPTER 6
6. Path of meditation
A Karma-yogi is also a renunciant
The Supreme Lord said: One who performs the prescribed duty 
without seeking its fruit only for personal enjoyment, is a renunciant 
(Samnyasi) and a Karma-yogi. One does not become Samnyasi 
merely by not lighting the fire, and one does not become a yogi 
merely by abstaining from work. (6.01) O Arjuna, what they call 
renunciation (Samnyasa) is also known as Karma-yoga. No one 
becomes a Karma-yogi who has not renounced the selfish motive 
behind an action. (6.02) 
A definition of yoga and yogi
For the wise who seeks to attain yoga of meditation or calmness of mind, Karma-yoga is said to be the means. For the one 
who has attained yoga, the calmness becomes the means of Selfrealization. A person is said to have attained yogic perfection when 
one has no desire for sensual pleasures or attachment to the fruits 
of work, and has renounced all selfish motives behind any action. 
(6.03-04)
Mind is both a friend and an enemy
One must elevate — and not degrade — oneself by one’s own 
mind. The mind alone is one’s friend as well as one’s enemy. The 
mind is the friend of those who have control over it, and the same 
mind acts like an enemy for those who do not control it. (6.05-06)
One who has control over the lower self — the mind and senses 
— is tranquil in heat and cold, in pleasure and pain, and in honor 
and dishonor, and remains ever steadfast with the supreme Self. 
(6.07) A person is called yogi who has both Self-knowledge and
Self-realization, who is calm, who has control over the mind and 
senses, and to whom a clod, a stone, and gold are the same. (6.08) 
A person is considered superior who is impartial towards companions, friends, enemies, neutrals, arbiters, haters, relatives, saints, 
and sinners. (6.09) 
Techniques of meditation
A yogi, seated in solitude and alone, should constantly try to 
contemplate the Supreme Being after bringing the mind and 


senses under control, and becoming free from desires and proprietorship. (6.10) One should sit on his or her own firm seat that is 
neither too high nor too low, covered with dry grass, a deerskin, 
and a cloth, one over the other, in a clean spot. Sitting there in a 
comfortable position and concentrating the mind on God, controlling the thoughts and the activities of the senses, one should practice meditation for self-purification. (6.11-12) One should sit by 
holding the waist, spine, chest, neck, and head erect, motionless 
and steady; fix the eyes and the mind steadily in front of the nostrils, without looking around; make your mind serene and fearless; 
practice celibacy; have the mind under control; think of Me; and 

have Me as the supreme goal. (6.13-14) Thus, by always practicing to keep the mind fixed on Me, the yogi whose mind is subdued 
attains peace of Nirvana and comes to Me. (6.15) 
This yoga is not possible, O Arjuna, for the one who eats too 
much or who does not eat at all; who sleeps too much or who keeps 
awake. (6.16) But for the one who is moderate in eating, recreation, 
working, sleeping, and waking, the yoga of meditation destroys all 
sorrow. (6.17) A person is said to have achieved yoga, the union 
with the Eternal Being, when the perfectly disciplined mind becomes free from all desires and gets completely united with God in 
Samadhi (trance). (6.18) A lamp in a spot sheltered by the Eternal 
Being from the wind of desires does not flicker; this simile is used 
for the subdued mind of a yogi, practicing meditation on the Eternal 
Being. (6.19) 
When the mind, disciplined by the practice of meditation, becomes steady, one becomes content with the Eternal Being by beholding Him with purified intellect. (6.20) One feels infinite bliss that 
is perceivable only through the intellect and is beyond the reach of 
the senses. After realizing the Eternal Being, one is never separated from the Absolute Reality. (6.21) After Self-realization (SR), 
one does not regard any other gain superior to SR. Established in 
SR, one is not moved even by the greatest calamity. (6.22) The 
state of severance of union with sorrow is called yoga. This yoga 
should be practiced with firm determination and without any mental 
reservation. (6.23) One gradually attains tranquility of mind by totally abandoning all selfish desires, completely restraining the 
senses from the sense objects by the intellect, keeping the mind 
fully absorbed in the Eternal Being by means of a well-trained and 
purified intellect, and thinking of Me. (6.24-25) Wheresoever this 
restless and unsteady mind wanders away during meditation, one 
should just witness it under the supervision of the Self. (6.26) 
Who is a yogi?
Supreme bliss comes to a Self-realized yogi, whose mind is 
tranquil, whose desires are under control, and who is free from sin 
(or faults). (6.27) Such a sinless yogi, who constantly engages his 
or her mind and intellect with the Eternal Being, easily enjoys the 
infinite bliss of contact with God. (6.28) Because of perceiving the 
omnipresent Eternal Being abiding in all beings, and all beings 
abiding in the Eternal Being; a yogi, who is in union with the Eternal 
Being, sees every being with an equal eye. (6.29) Those who perceive Me in everything and behold everything in Me, are not separated from Me, and I am not separated from them. (6.30) The nondualists, who adore Me as abiding in all beings, abide in Me irrespective of their mode of living. (6.31) One is considered the best 
yogi who regards every being like oneself and who can feel the 
pain and pleasures of others as one’s own, O Arjuna. (6.32) 
Two methods to subdue the mind
Arjuna said: O Krishna, You have said that the yoga of meditation is characterized by the calmness of mind, but due to restlessness of mind, I do not perceive the steady state of mind. Because 
the mind, indeed, is very unsteady, turbulent, powerful, and obstinate, O Krishna. I think restraining the mind is as difficult as restraining the wind. (6.33-34) The Supreme Lord said: Undoubtedly, 
O Arjuna, the mind is restless and difficult to restrain, but it is subdued by constant vigorous spiritual practice with perseverance, 
Self-knowledge and detachment, O Arjuna. (6.35) In My opinion, 
yoga is difficult for the one whose mind is not subdued. However, 
yoga is attainable by the person of subdued mind by striving 
through proper means. (6.36) 
Destination of unsuccessful yogi
Arjuna said: The faithful who deviates from the path of meditation and fails to attain yogic perfection due to unsubdued mind —
what is the destination of such a person, O Krishna? (6.37) Does 
he not perish like a dispersing cloud, O Krishna, having lost both 
worldly and heavenly pleasures; supportless and bewildered on 
the path of Self-realization? (6.38) O Krishna, only You are able to 
completely dispel this doubt of mine because there is none, other 
than You, who can dispel this doubt. (6.39) The Supreme Lord 
said: There is no destruction, O Arjuna, for a yogi either here or 
hereafter. A spiritualist is never put to grief, My dear friend. (6.40) 
The unsuccessful yogi is reborn in the house of the pious and 
prosperous after attaining heaven and living there for many years, 
or such a yogi is born in a family of enlightened yogis. A birth like 
this is very difficult, indeed, to obtain in this world. (6.41-42) There 
a yogi regains the knowledge acquired in the previous life and 
strives again to achieve perfection, O Arjuna. (6.43) The unsuccessful yogi is instinctively carried towards the Eternal Being by 
virtue of the impressions (Samskara) of yogic practices of previous 
lives. Even the inquirer of yoga — the union with God — surpasses 
those who perform Vedic rituals. (6.44) The yogi who diligently 


strives, becomes completely free from all sins or imperfections after gradually perfecting through many incarnations, and reaches 
the Supreme Abode. (6.45) 
Who is the best yogi?
The yogi is superior to the ascetics. The yogi is superior to the 
scholars. The yogi is superior to the ritualists. Therefore, O Arjuna, 
be a yogi. (6.46) I consider the yogi-devotee — who lovingly contemplates Me with supreme faith, and whose mind is ever absorbed in Me — to be the best of all the yogis. (6.47)
CHAPTER 7
7. Self-knowledge and enlightenment

The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, listen how you shall know 
Me fully without any doubt, with your mind absorbed in Me, taking 
refuge in Me, and performing yogic practices. (7.01) I shall impart 
you Self-knowledge, together with enlightenment, after comprehending that nothing more remains to be known in this world. (7.02) 
Scarcely one out of thousands of persons strives for perfection of 
Self-realization. Scarcely one among those successful strivers 
truly understands Me. (7.03)
Definitions of matter, consciousness, and spirit
The mind, intellect, ego, ether, air, fire, water, and earth are the 
eightfold transformation (or division) of My material energy (Prakriti). (7.04) The material energy is My lower Nature. My other 
higher Nature is Spirit (Purusha) by which this entire universe is 
sustained, O Arjuna. (7.05) Know that all creatures have evolved 
from this twofold energy; and I, the Supreme Being, am the source 
of origin, as well as dissolution of the entire universe. (7.06) 
The Supreme spirit is the basis of everything
There is nothing higher than Me, O Arjuna. Everything in the 
universe is strung on Me like jewels are strung on the thread of a 
necklace. (7.07) O Arjuna, I am the sapidity in the water, I am the 
radiance in the sun and the moon, the sacred syllable ‘OM’ in all 
the Vedas, the sound in the ether, and potency in human beings. I 
am the sweet fragrance in the earth. I am the heat in the fire, the 
life in all living beings, and the austerity in the ascetics. (7.08-09) 
O Arjuna, know Me to be the eternal seed of all creatures. I am the 
intelligence of the intelligent and the brilliance of the brilliant. I am 
the strength of the strong that is devoid of lust and attachment. I 
am lust (Cupid) in human beings that is in accord with righteousness (Dharma) for the sacred and sole purpose of procreation after 
marriage, O Arjuna. (7.10-11) Know that three modes (Gunas) of 
Nature — goodness, passion, and ignorance — also emanate from 
Me. I am not dependent on or affected by the Gunas, but the Gunas 
are dependent on Me. (7.12) Human beings are deluded by the 
various aspects of these three Gunas of Nature; therefore, they do 
not know Me, who is eternal and above these Gunas. (7.13) 
Who seeks God?
This divine power (Maya) of Mine, consisting of three modes 
(Gunas) of Nature, is very difficult to overcome. Only those who 
surrender unto Me can easily cross over this Maya. (7.14) The evil 
doers, the ignorant, the lowest persons who are attached to demonic nature and whose power of discrimination has been taken 
away by divine illusive power (Maya) do not worship or seek Me. 
(7.15) 
Four types of virtuous ones worship or seek Me, O Arjuna. They 
are: The distressed, the seeker of Self-knowledge, the seeker of 
wealth, and the enlightened one who has experienced the Supreme. (7.16) Among them the enlightened devotee, who is ever 
united with Me and whose devotion is single-minded, is the best, 
because I am very dear to the enlightened, and the enlightened is 
also very dear to Me. (7.17) All these seekers are indeed noble, 
but I regard the enlightened devotee as My very Self. One who is 
steadfast becomes one with Me and abides in My supreme abode. 
(7.18) After many births the enlightened one resorts to Me by realizing that everything is, indeed, My manifestation. Such a great 
soul is very rare. (7.19) Persons whose judgement has been carried away by various desires, impelled by their Karmic impression 
(Samskara), resort to celestial controllers and practice various religious rites. (7.20) 
God can be seen in any image of worship
Whosoever desires to worship whatever deity (using any 
name, form, and method) with faith, I make their faith steady in that 
very deity. Endowed with steady faith, they worship that deity and 
fulfil their wishes through that deity. Those wishes are, indeed, 
granted only by Me. (7.21-22) Such material gains of these less 
intelligent human beings are temporary. The worshipers of celestial controllers go to celestial controllers, but My devotees certainly 
come to Me. (7.23) 
The ignorant ones — unable to understand My immutable, incomparable, incomprehensible and transcendental form, assume 
that I am formless and take form just as humans do. (7.24) Concealed by My divine power (Maya), I do not reveal Myself to the 
ignorant ones, who do not know and understand My unborn, eternal, transcendental form and personality — and consider Me formless! (7.25) 
I know, O Arjuna, the beings of the past, of the present, and 
those of the future, but no one really knows Me. (7.26) All beings 
in this world are in utter ignorance due to delusion of pairs of opposites born of likes and dislikes, O Arjuna. But persons of unselfish deeds, whose Karma or sin has come to an end, become free 


from the delusion of pairs of opposites and worship Me with firm 
resolve. (7.27-28) Those who strive for freedom from the cycles of 
birth, old age, and death by taking refuge in Me; fully comprehend 
Eternal Being, the nature of Eternal Being, and Karma, the power 
of Eternal Being. (7.29) The steadfast persons who know Me as 
everything: The mortal beings, temporal Divine Beings, the Supersoul, even at the time of death, attain Me. (7.30)
CHAPTER 8
8. The eternal being, God
Arjuna said: O Krishna, who is the Eternal Being? What is the 
nature of the Eternal Being? What is Karma? Who are the mortal 

beings? And who are Divine Beings? Who is the Supersoul, and 
how does He dwell in the body? How can You be remembered at 
the time of death by those who have control over their minds, O 
Krishna? (8.01-02)
Definitions of supreme spirit, spirit, individual soul
The Supreme Lord said: The immutable Spirit is called Eternal 
Being or God. The nature, including the inherent power of cognition 
and desire, of God is called Adhyatma. The creative power of God
that causes manifestation of living entities is called Karma. (8.03) 
Mortal beings are called Adhibhuta. The expansions of Divine Personality are called Divine Beings. I am the Supersoul residing inside every cell of living beings as the supreme controller, O Arjuna. 
(8.04)
Theory of reincarnation and Karma
The one who remembers Me exclusively, even while leaving 
the body at the time of death, attains Me; there is no doubt about 
it. (8.05) Remembering whatever object one leaves the body at the 
end of life, one attains that object, O Arjuna. Because of the constant thought of that object, one remembers that object at the end 
of life and achieves it. (8.06)
A simple method of God-realization
Therefore, always remember Me and do your duty. You shall 
certainly attain Me if your mind and intellect are ever focused on 
Me. (8.07) By contemplating on Me with an unwavering mind that 
is disciplined by the practice of meditation, one attains the Supreme Being, O Arjuna. (8.08) One who meditates on the Supreme 
Being — as the omniscient, the oldest, the controller, smaller than 
the smallest and bigger than the biggest, sustainer of everything, 
the inconceivable, self-luminous like the sun, and beyond material 
reality — at the time of death with steadfast mind and devotion; 
making the flow of bioimpulses (life forces, Prana) rise up to the 
middle of two eye brows (or the sixth Chakra) by the power of yoga 
and holding there, attains the Supreme Divine Person. (8.09-10) I 
shall briefly explain the process to attain the supreme abode that 
the knowers of the Veda call immutable; into which the ascetics, 
freed from attachment, enter; and desiring which, people lead a life 
of celibacy. (8.11) 
Attain salvation by meditating on God
When one leaves the physical body by controlling all the 
senses, focusing the mind on God, engaged in yogic practice, 
meditating on Me and uttering OM — the sacred monosyllable 
sound power of Eternal Being — one attains the supreme abode. 
(8.12-13) I am easily attainable, O Arjuna, by that ever steadfast 
yogi who always thinks of e and whose mind does not go elsewhere. (8.14) After attaining Me, the great souls do not incur rebirth 
in this miserable transitory world because they have attained the 
highest perfection. (8.15) The dwellers of all the worlds — up to 
and including the world of Brahma, the creator — are subject to the 
miseries of repeated birth and death. But, after attaining Me, O Arjuna, one does not take birth again. (8.16)
Everything in the creation is cyclic
Those who know that the day of the creator (Brahma) lasts one 
thousand Yugas (or 4.32 billion solar years) and that his night also 
lasts one thousand Yugas, they are the knowers of day and night. 
(8.17) All manifestations come out of the primary material Nature 
(Adi-Prakriti) at the arrival of the day of Brahma, the Creative 
Power, and they again merge into the same at the coming of 
Brahma’s night. (8.18) The same multitude of beings comes into 
existence again and again at the arrival of the day of the creator 
(Brahma); and are annihilated, inevitably, at the arrival of Brahma’s 
night. (8.19) 
There is another eternal existence — higher than the changeable material Nature (Prakriti) — that does not perish when all created beings perish. This is called the Eternal Being. This is also 
said to be the supreme abode. Those who attain My supreme 
abode do not take birth again. (8.20-21) This supreme abode, O 
Arjuna, is attainable by unswerving devotion to Me, within which all 
beings exist and by which all this universe is pervaded. (8.22) 
Two basic paths of departure after death
O Arjuna, now I shall describe different paths departing by 
which, after death, the yogis do or do not come back. (8.23) Passing gradually, after death, through celestial controllers of fire, light, 
daytime, the bright lunar fortnight, and the six months of the northern solstice of the sun, yogis who know the Self attain supreme 
abode and do not come back to earth. (8.24) Passing gradually, 
after death, through celestial controllers of smoke, night, the dark 
lunar fortnight, and the six months of southern solstice of the sun, 
the righteous person attains heaven and comes back to earth 
again. (8.25) The path of light of Self-knowledge and the path of 


darkness of ignorance are thought to be the world’s two eternal 
paths. The former leads to salvation (Mukti, Nirvana), and the latter 
leads to rebirth. (8.26) 
Spiritual knowledge leads to salvation
Knowing these two paths, O Arjuna, a yogi is not bewildered at 
all. Therefore, O Arjuna, be steadfast in yoga (union) with Me at all 
times. (8.27) The yogi who knows all this goes beyond getting the 
benefits of the study of the Vedas, performance of sacrifices, austerities, and charities, and attains My Supreme Eternal Abode. 
(8.28) 

CHAPTER 9
9. Supreme knowledge and the big mystery
The Supreme Lord said: I shall reveal to you, who do not disbelieve, the most profound, secret, spiritual knowledge, together 
with spiritual experience. Knowing this, you will be freed from the 
miseries of worldly existence. (9.01) 
Knowledge of the supreme is the biggest mystery
This Self-knowledge is the king of all knowledge, is the most 
secret, is very sacred, can be perceived by instinct, conforms to 
righteousness (Dharma), is very easy to practice, and is timeless. 
(9.02) O Arjuna, those who have no faith in this knowledge do not 
attain Me and follow the cycles of birth and death. (9.03) This entire 
universe is an expansion of Mine. All beings depend on Me. I do 
not depend on them, because I am the highest of all. (9.04) Look 
at the power of My divine mystery; in reality, I — the sustainer and 
creator of all beings — do not depend on them, and they also do 
not depend on Me. (9.05) 
NOTE: It’s like a gold-chain depends on gold, and milk products depend on milk. In fact, the gold-chain does not depend on 
gold; the chain is nothing but gold! Similarly, matter and energy are 
different as well as non-different.
Perceive that all beings remain in Me, without any connection
or contact, as the mighty wind, moving everywhere in the sky, eternally remains in space. (9.06) 
The theory of evolution and involution
All beings merge into My Adi-Prakriti (primary material Nature) 
at the end of a cycle of just over 311 trillion solar years, O Arjuna, 
and I create them again at the beginning of the next cycle. (9.07) I 
create the entire multitude of beings again and again with the help 
of My material Nature. These beings are under control of the three 
modes of material Nature. (9.08) These acts of creation do not bind 
Me, O Arjuna, because I remain indifferent and unattached to those 
acts. (9.09) The divine kinetic energy (Maya) — with the help of 
material Nature — creates all animate and inanimate objects under 
My supervision; thus, the creation keeps on going, O Arjuna. (9.10) 
The ways of the wise and of the ignorant
Ignorant persons hate Me when I appear in human form because they do not know My spiritual nature as the great Lord of all 
beings and take Me for an ordinary human. They have false hopes, 
false actions, false knowledge, and delusive qualities (See 16.04-
18) of fiends and demons and are unable to recognize Me. (9.11-
12) But great souls, O Arjuna, who possess divine qualities (See 
16.01-03), know Me as immutable, as both the material and efficient cause of creation, and worship Me single-mindedly with loving devotion. (9.13) Persons of firm resolve worship Me with ever 
steadfast devotion by always singing My glories, striving to attain 
Me, and prostrating before Me with devotion. (9.14) Some worship 
Me by acquiring and propagating Self-knowledge. Others worship 
the infinite as the One in all (or non-dual), as the master of all (or 
dual), and in various other ways. (9.15) 
Everything is a manifestation of God
I am the ritual, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering, I am the 
herb, I am the mantra, I am the clarified butter, I am the fire, and I 
am the oblation. I am the supporter of the universe, the father, the 
mother, and the grandfather. I am the object of knowledge, the sacred syllable ‘OM’, and also the Vedas. I am the goal, the supporter, the Lord, the witness, the abode, the refuge, the friend, the 
origin, the dissolution, the foundation, the substratum, and the immutable seed. (9.16-18) I give heat. I send, as well as withhold, the 
rain. I am immortality, as well as death. I am also both the absolute 
and the temporal, O Arjuna. (9.19)
The Supreme Being has become everything!
Attaining salvation by devotional love
The performers of rituals prescribed in the Vedas, the drinkers 
of the nectar of devotion, whose sins are cleansed, worship Me by 
doing good deeds for gaining heaven. As a result of their meritorious deeds, they go to heaven and enjoy celestial sense pleasures. 
(9.20) They return to the mortal world — after enjoying the wide 
world of heavenly pleasures — upon exhaustion of their good 
Karma. Thus, following the ritualistic injunctions of the Vedas, persons working for the fruit of their actions take repeated birth and 
death. (9.21) 
I personally take care of both the material and spiritual welfare 
of those ever-steadfast devotees who always remember and adore 
Me with single-minded contemplation. (9.22) O Arjuna, even those 
devotees who worship the deities with faith, they also worship Me, 
but in an improper way. (9.23) Because I — the Supreme Being —
alone am the enjoyer of all sacrificial services and Lord of the universe. But people do not know My true, spiritual nature. Therefore, 


they fall into the repeated cycles of birth and death. (9.24) Worshippers of the deities go to the deities; worshippers of ancestors 
go to the ancestors, and worshippers of the ghosts go to the 
ghosts; but My devotees come to Me and are not born again. (9.25) 
The Lord accepts and eats the offering of love
Whosoever offers Me a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or water with devotion, I accept and eat the offering of devotion by the purehearted. (9.26) O Arjuna, whatever you do, whatever you eat, 
whatever you offer as oblation to the sacred fire, whatever charity 
you give, whatever austerity you perform, do all that as an offering 
unto Me. (9.27) You shall become free from the bondage — good 

and bad — of Karma by this attitude of complete renunciation 
(Samnyasa-yoga). Becoming liberated, you shall come to Me. 
(9.28) 
There is no unforgivable sinner
The Self is present equally in all beings. There is no one hateful 
or dear to Me. But those who worship Me with love and devotion 
are very close to Me, and I am also very close to them. (9.29) Even 
if the most sinful person resolves to worship Me with singleminded, loving devotion; such a person must be regarded as a 
saint because of making the right resolution. (9.30)
There are no unforgivable sins or sinners. The fire of 
sincere repentance burns all sins. 
Such a person soon becomes righteous and attains everlasting 
peace. Be aware, O Arjuna, that My devotee shall never perish or 
fall down. (9.31) 
The path of devotional love is easier
Anybody — including women, merchants, laborers, and the 
evil-minded — can attain the supreme abode by just surrendering 
unto My will with loving devotion, O Arjuna. (9.32) It should then be 
very easy for holy priests and devout sages to attain the Supreme.
Therefore, having obtained this joyless and transitory human life, 
one should always worship Me with loving devotion. (9.33) Fix your 
mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me, and bow down to Me. 
Thus, uniting yourself with Me by setting Me as the supreme goal 
and the sole refuge, you shall certainly come to Me. (9.34) 
CHAPTER 10
10. Manifestation of the absolute
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, listen once again to My supreme word that I shall speak to you, who are very dear to Me, for 
your welfare. (10.01) 
God is the origin of everything
Neither the celestial controllers (Devas), nor the great sages 
know My origin because I am the origin of all Devas and great 
sages also. (10.02) One who knows Me as the unborn, the beginningless, and the Supreme Lord of the universe, is considered wise 
among the mortals and becomes liberated from the bondage of 
Karma. (10.03) Intelligence, Self-knowledge, non-delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, control over the mind and senses, tranquility, pleasure, pain, birth, death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, 
calmness, contentment, austerity, charity, fame, ill fame — these 
diverse qualities in human beings also arise from Me. (10.04-05) 
The seven great sages from whom all the creatures of the world 
were born, originated from My potential energy. (10.06) 
One who truly understands My manifestations and yogic powers, is united with Me by unswerving devotion. There is no doubt 
about it. (10.07) I am the origin of all. Everything emanates from 
Me. Understanding this, the wise adore Me with love and devotion. 
(10.08) My devotees remain ever content and delighted. Their 
minds remain absorbed in Me and their lives surrendered unto Me. 
They always enlighten each other by talking about Me. (10.09)
God gives spiritual knowledge to His devotees
I give knowledge and understanding of metaphysical science 
— to those who are ever united with Me and lovingly adore Me —
by which they come to Me. (10.10) I, who dwell within their inner 
psyche as consciousness, destroy the darkness born of ignorance 
by the shining lamp of spiritual knowledge as an act of compassion 
for them. (10.11) Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Being, the Supreme Abode, the Supreme Purifier, the Eternal Divine Being, the 
primal God, the unborn, and the omnipresent. All sages have thus
acclaimed You. And now You Yourself tell me that. (10.12-13) 
Nobody can know the real nature of Reality
O Krishna, I believe all that You have told me to be true. O 
Lord, neither the celestial controllers nor the demons fully understand Your real nature. (10.14) O Creator and Lord of all beings, 
God of all celestial rulers, Supreme person, and Lord of the universe, You alone know Yourself by Yourself. (10.15) Therefore, 
You alone are able to fully describe Your own divine manifestations 
by which You exist pervading all the universes. (10.16) How may I 
know You, O Lord, by constant contemplation? In what form of 
manifestation am I to think of You, O Lord? (10.17) O Lord, explain 
to me again, in detail, Your yogic power and glory because I am 
not satiated by hearing Your nectar-like words. (10.18)
Everything is a manifestation of the Absolute
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, now I shall explain to you 
My prominent divine manifestations because My manifestations 
are endless. (10.19) O Arjuna, I am the Spirit abiding in the inner 
psyche of all beings. I am also the beginning, the middle, and the 
end of all beings. (10.20) I am the sustainer, I am the radiant sun 
among the luminaries, I am the supernatural controllers of wind, I 
am the moon among the stars. (10.21) I am the Vedas, I am the 


celestial rulers, I am the mind among the senses, I am the consciousness in living beings. (10.22) I am Lord Shiva, I am the god 
of wealth, I am the god of fire, and the mountains. (10.23) I am the 
priest and the army general of the celestial controllers, O Arjuna. I 
am the ocean among the bodies of water. (10.24) I am sage Bhrigu 
among the great sages; I am the monosyllable cosmic sound, OM
, Amin, Allah among the words; I am the silent repetition of mantra 
(Japa) among the spiritual disciplines; and I am the Himalaya 
among the mountains. (10.25)
A brief description of divine manifestations

I am the holy fig tree among the trees, and I am all other celestial rulers. (10.26) Know Me as the celestial animal among the animals and the King among men. I am the thunderbolt among weapons, and I am Cupid for procreation. (10.27-28) I am the water god 
and the manes. I am the controller of death. I am death among the 
healers, lion among the beasts, and the king of birds among birds. 
(10.29-30) I am the wind among the purifiers and Lord Rama 
among the warriors. I am the crocodile among the fishes and the 
holy Ganga river among the rivers. (10.31) 
I am the beginning, the middle, and the end of all creation, O 
Arjuna. Among knowledge I am knowledge of the supreme Self. I 
am logic of the logician. (10.32) I am the letter ‘A’ among the alphabets. I am the dual compound among the compound words. I 
am the endless time. I am the sustainer of all, and have faces on 
all sides (or I am omniscient). (10.33) I am the all-devouring death 
and also the origin of future beings. I am the seven goddesses or 
guardian angels presiding over the seven qualities: Fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intellect, resolve, and forgiveness. (10.34) 
I am the Vedic hymns. I am Gayatri mantra among the Vedic mantras. I am November-December among the months, I am the spring 
among the seasons. (10.35) I am gambling of the cheats, splendor 
of the splendid, victory of the victorious, resolution of the resolute, 
and goodness of the good. (10.36) 
I am Krishna, Arjuna, sage Vyasa among the sages, and 
Ushana among the great poets. (10.37) I am the power of rulers, 
the statesmanship of the seekers of victory, I am silence among 
the secrets, and the Self-knowledge of the knowledgeable. (10.38) 
I am the origin of all beings, O Arjuna. There is nothing, animate or 
inanimate, that can exist without Me. (10.39) 
Creation is a small part of the Absolute
There is no end of My divine manifestations, O Arjuna. This is 
only a brief description by Me of the extent of My divine manifestations. (10.40) Whatever is endowed with glory, brilliance, and 
power — know that to be a manifestation of a very small fraction of 
My splendor. (10.41) What is the need for this detailed knowledge, 
O Arjuna? I continually support the entire universe by a small fraction of My divine power, Maya. (10.42) 
CHAPTER 11
11. Vision of the universal form
Arjuna said: My illusion is dispelled by the profound words of 
wisdom You spoke out of compassion for me about the supreme 
secret of Eternal Being. (11.01) O Krishna, I have heard from You 
in detail about the origin and dissolution of beings and Your immutable glory. (11.02) 
The vision of God is the ultimate aim of a seeker
O Lord, You are as You have said, yet I wish to see Your divine 
cosmic form, O Supreme Being. (11.03) O Lord, if You think it is 
possible for me to see Your universal form, then, O Lord of the 
yogis, show me Your transcendental form. (11.04) The Supreme 
Lord said: O Arjuna, behold My hundreds and thousands of multifarious divine forms of different colors and shapes. Behold all the 
celestial beings and many wonders never seen before. Also behold 
the entire creation — animate, inanimate, and whatever else you 
would like to see — all at one place in My body. (11.05-07) But you 
are not able to see Me with your physical eye; therefore, I give you 
the divine eye to see My majestic power and glory. (11.08)
Lord Krishna shows His cosmic form 
Sanjaya said: O King, having said this, Lord Krishna, the great 
Lord of the mystic power of yoga, revealed His supreme majestic 
form to Arjuna. (11.09) Arjuna saw the Universal Form of the Lord 
with many mouths and eyes, and many marvelous visions with numerous divine ornaments, holding many divine weapons, wearing 
divine garlands and apparel, anointed with celestial perfumes and 
ointments, full of all wonders — the limitless God with faces on all 
sides. (11.10-11) If the splendor of thousands of suns were to blaze 
forth all at once in the sky, even that would not resemble the splendor of that exalted being. (11.12) Arjuna saw the entire universe, 
divided in many ways, but standing as all in One in the transcendental body of Krishna, the Lord of celestial rulers. (11.13) 
One may not be prepared or qualified to see God
Upon seeing the cosmic form of the Lord, Arjuna was filled with 
wonder; and his hairs standing on end, bowed his head to the Lord 
and prayed with folded hands. (11.14) Arjuna said: O Lord, I see in 
Your body all supernatural controllers and multitudes of beings, all 
sages, celestial serpents, Lord Shiva, as well as Lord Brahma
seated on the lotus. (11.15) O Lord of the universe, I see You everywhere with infinite forms, with many arms, stomachs, faces, and 
eyes. O Universal Form, I see neither your beginning nor the middle nor the end. (11.16) I see You with crown, club, 

discus, and 
massive radiance, difficult to behold, shining all around like the immeasurable brilliance and blazing fire of the sun. (11.17)
I believe You are the Supreme Being to be realized. You are the 
ultimate resort of the universe. You are the Eternal Being and protector of the eternal order (Dharma). (11.18) I see You with infinite 
power, without beginning, middle, or end; with many arms; with the 
sun and the moon as Your eyes; with Your mouth as a blazing fire, 
scorching all the universe with Your radiance. (11.19) O Lord, the 
entire space between heaven and earth in all directions is pervaded by You. Seeing Your marvelous and terrible form, the three 
worlds are trembling with fear. (11.20) Hosts of supernatural rulers 

enter into You. Some with folded hands sing Your names and glories in fear. A multitude of perfected beings hail and adore You with 
abundant praises. (11.21) All the celestial beings amazingly gaze 
at You. Seeing your infinite form with many mouths, eyes, arms, 
thighs, feet, stomachs, and many fearful tusks; the worlds are trembling with fear, and so do I, O mighty Lord. (11.22-23)
Arjuna is frightened to see the Cosmic form
Seeing Your effulgent and colorful form touching the sky; Your 
mouth wide open and large shining eyes; I am frightened and find 
neither peace nor courage, O Krishna. (11.24) Seeing Your mouths 
with fearful tusks, glowing like fires of cosmic dissolution, I lose my 
sense of direction and find no comfort. Have mercy on me, O Lord 
of celestial rulers, refuge of the universe! (11.25) All my cousin 
brothers, along with the hosts of other kings and warriors of the 
other side, together with chief warriors on our side, are also quickly 
entering into Your fearful mouths with terrible tusks. Some are 
seen caught in between the tusks with their heads crushed. (11.26-
27) These warriors of the mortal world are entering Your blazing 
mouths as many torrents of the rivers enter into the ocean. (11.28) 
All these people are rapidly rushing into Your mouths for destruction as moths rush with great speed into the blazing flame for destruction. (11.29) You are licking up all the worlds with Your flaming 
mouths, swallowing them from all sides. Your powerful radiance is 
filling the entire universe with effulgence and burning it, O Krishna. 
(11.30) Tell me who You are in such a fierce form? My salutations 
to You, O best of all celestial rulers, be merciful! I wish to understand You, O primal Being, because I do not know Your mission. 
(11.31) 
We are only a divine instrument
The Supreme Lord said: I am death, the mighty destroyer of 
the world. I have come here to destroy all these people. Even without your participation in the war, all the warriors standing arrayed 
in the opposing armies shall cease to exist. (11.32) Therefore get 
up and attain glory. Conquer your enemies, and enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these warriors have already been destroyed by 
Me. You be a mere My instrument, O Arjuna. (11.33)
This is My battle, not yours. I use you, O Arjuna, only as an 
instrument. I do everything through your body. One must 
remember at all times that all battles are His, not ours. The will and 
power of God do everything.
Kill all these great warriors who are already killed by Me. Do 
not fear. You will certainly conquer the enemies in the battle; therefore, fight! (11.34) 
Arjuna’s prayers to the Cosmic form
Sanjaya said: Having heard these words of Krishna, the 
crowned Arjuna, trembling with folded hands, prostrated with fear 
and spoke to Krishna in a choked voice. (11.35) Arjuna said: 
Rightly, O Krishna, the world delights and rejoices in glorifying You. 
Terrified demons flee in all directions. The hosts of perfected ones 
bow to You in adoration. (11.36) Why should they not — O great 
soul — bow to You, the original creator who is even greater than 
Brahma, the creator of material worlds? O infinite Lord, O God of 
all celestial rulers, O abode of the universe, You are both Sat (eternal) and Asat (temporal), and the Supreme Being that is beyond 
both Sat and Asat. (11.37) 
You are the primal God, the most ancient Person. You are the 
ultimate resort of all the universe. You are the knower, the object 
of knowledge, and the supreme abode. The entire universe is pervaded by You, O Lord of the infinite form. (11.38) You are the controller of death, the fire, the wind, the water god, the moon god, and 
Brahma, the creator, as well as the father of Brahma. Salutations 
to You a thousand times, and again and again salutations to You. 
(11.39) My salutations to You from front and from behind. O Lord, 
my obeisance to You from all sides. You are infinite valor and 
boundless might. You pervade everything; therefore, You are everywhere and in everything. (11.40) 
Considering You merely as a friend, and not knowing Your 
greatness, I have inadvertently addressed You as O Krishna, O 
Yadava, O friend, etc., merely out of affection or carelessness. 
(11.41) In whatever way I may have insulted You in jokes while 
playing, reposing in bed, sitting, or at meals; when alone or in front 
of others, O Krishna, the immeasurable One, I implore You for forgiveness. (11.42) You are the father of this animate and inanimate 
world, and the greatest Guru to be worshipped. No one is even 
equal to You in the three worlds; how can there be one greater than 
You, O Being of incomparable glory? (11.43)
Therefore, O adorable Lord, I seek Your mercy by bowing down 
and prostrating my body before You. Bear with me as a father to 
his son, as a friend to a friend, and as a husband to his wife, O 
Lord. (11.44) I am delighted by beholding that which has never 


been seen before, and yet my mind is tormented with fear. Therefore, O God of celestial rulers, the refuge of the universe, have
mercy on me and show me Your four-armed form. (11.45)
One may see God in any form 
I wish to see You with a crown, holding mace and discus in 
Your hand. Therefore, O Lord, with thousand arms and universal 
form, please appear in the four-armed form. (11.46) The Supreme 
Lord said: O Arjuna, being pleased with you I have shown you —
through My own yogic powers — this particular, supreme, shining, 
universal, infinite, and primal form of Mine that has never been 
seen before by anyone other than you. (11.47) O Arjuna, neither 

by study of the Vedas, nor by sacrifice, nor by charity, nor by rituals, nor by severe austerities, can I be seen in this cosmic form by 
anyone other than you in this human world. (11.48) 
Do not be perturbed and confused by seeing such a terrible form 
of Mine as this. With fearless and cheerful mind, now behold My 
four-armed form. (11.49) Sanjaya said: After speaking like this to 
Arjuna, Lord Krishna revealed His four-armed form. And then assuming His pleasant human form, Lord Krishna, the Great One, 
consoled Arjuna who was terrified. (11.50) Arjuna said: O Krishna, 
seeing this lovely human form of Yours, I have now become tranquil and I am normal again. (11.51) 
God can be seen by devotional love
The Supreme Lord said: This (four-armed) form of Mine that 
you have seen is very difficult, indeed, to see. Even celestial controllers are ever longing to see this form. (11.52) This four-armed 
form of Mine that you have just seen cannot be seen even by study 
of the Vedas, or by austerity, or by acts of charity, or by the performance of rituals. (11.53) However, through single-minded devotion 
alone, I can be seen in this form, can be known in essence, and 
also can be reached, O Arjuna. (11.54) One who dedicates all 
works to Me, and to whom I am the supreme goal, who is my devotee, who has no attachment, and is free from enmity towards any 
being — attains Me, O Arjuna. (11.55)
CHAPTER 12
12. Path of devotion
Worship a personal or impersonal God?
Arjuna said: Which of these has the best knowledge of yoga —
those ever-steadfast devotees who worship You as Krishna, Your 
personal aspect, or those who worship Your impersonal aspect, 
the Eternal Being? (12.01) The Supreme Lord said: I consider the 
best yogis to be those ever-steadfast devotees who worship with 
supreme faith by fixing their mind on Me as their personal god. 
(12.02) They also attain Me who worship the unchangeable, the 
inexplicable, the invisible, the omnipresent, the inconceivable, the 
unchanging, and the immovable Eternal Being; restraining all the 
senses, even minded under all circumstances, and engaged in the 
welfare of all creatures. (12.03-04)
Reasons for worshipping a personal God
Self-realization is more difficult for those who fix their mind on 
the impersonal, unmanifest, Eternal Being because comprehension of the unmanifest by human beings is attained with difficulty. 
(12.05) But for those who worship Me with unswerving devotion as 
their personal god, offer all actions to Me, intent on Me as the Supreme, and meditate on Me; I swiftly become their savior — from 
the world that is the ocean of death and transmigration — whose 
thoughts are set on My personal form, O Arjuna. (12.06-07)
The four paths to God
Therefore, focus your mind on Me, and let your intellect dwell 
upon Me through meditation and contemplation. Thereafter, you 
shall certainly attain Me. (12.08) If you are unable to focus your 
mind steadily on Me, then long to attain Me, O Arjuna, by practice 
of any other spiritual discipline that suits you. (12.09) If you are 
unable even to do any spiritual discipline, then be intent on performing all your duty for Me. You shall attain perfection just by 
working for Me as an instrument, just to serve and please Me, without selfish motives. (12.10) If you are unable to work for Me, then 
just surrender unto My will and renounce the attachment to and 
anxiety for the fruits of all work with subdued mind — by learning 
to accept all results, as God's grace. (12.11)
Karma-yoga is the best Path
The knowledge of scriptures is better than mere ritualistic practice; meditation is better than scriptural knowledge; renunciation of 
attachment to the fruits of all work is better than meditation; peace 
immediately follows renunciation. (See more on renunciation in 
18.02, 18.09) (12.12)
The attributes of a devotee
One who does not hate any creature, who is friendly and compassionate, free from the notion of "I" and "my", even-minded in 
pain and pleasure, forgiving; and the yogi who is ever content, who 
has subdued the mind, whose resolve is firm, whose mind and intellect are engaged in dwelling upon Me, who is devoted to Me —
is dear to Me. (12.13-14) The one by whom others are not agitated 
and who is not agitated by others, who is free from joy, envy, fear, 
and anxiety is also dear to Me. (12.15) One who is desireless, pure, 
wise, impartial, and free from anxiety; who has renounced the doership in all undertakings—such a devotee is dear to Me. (12.16) 
One who neither rejoices nor grieves, neither likes nor dislikes, 
who has renounced both the good and the evil, and is full of devotion—is dear to Me. (12.17) The one who remains the 

same towards friend or foe, in honor or disgrace, in heat or cold, in pleasure 
or pain; who is free from attachment; who is indifferent to censure 
or praise, quiet, content with whatever one has, unattached to a 
place, a country, or a house; calm, and full of devotion — that person is dear to Me. (12.18-19)
One should sincerely try to develop divine qualities 
But those faithful devotees are very dear to Me who set Me as 
their supreme goal and follow—or just sincerely try to develop—
the above mentioned nectar of moral values. (12.20)
CHAPTER 13
13. Creation and the creator

The theory of creation
The Supreme Lord said: O Arjuna, this physical body, a miniature universe, may be called the creation. One who knows the creation is called the creator by the seers of truth. (13.01) O Arjuna, 
know Me to be the creator of all the creation. The true understanding of both the creator and the creation is considered by Me to be 
the spiritual or metaphysical knowledge. (13.02) What the creation 
is, what it’s like, what its transformations are, where its source is, 
who that creator is, and what His powers are — hear all these from 
Me in brief. (13.03) The seers have separately described the creation and the creator in different ways in the Vedic hymns, and also 
in the conclusive and convincing verses of the Brahma-Sutra. 
(13.04) The primary material Nature, cosmic intellect, "I" consciousness or ego, five basic elements, ten organs, mind, five 
sense objects; and desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the physical 
body, consciousness, and resolve — thus the entire field has been 
briefly described with its transformations. (13.05-06) 
The fourfold noble truth as means of Nirvana
Humility, modesty, nonviolence, forgiveness, honesty, service 
to guru, purity of thought, word, and deed, steadfastness, self-control; and aversion towards sense objects, absence of ego; constant 
reflection on pain and suffering inherent in birth, old age, disease, 
and death; (13.07-08) detached attachment with family members, 
home, etc.; unfailing calmness upon attainment of the desirable 
and the undesirable; and unswerving devotion to Me through single-minded contemplation, taste for solitude, distaste for social 
gatherings and gossips; steadfastness in acquiring the knowledge 
of Eternal Being, and seeing the omnipresent Supreme Being everywhere — this is said to be knowledge. That which is contrary to 
this is ignorance. (13.09-11)
God can be described by parables only
I shall fully describe the object of knowledge — knowing which 
one attains immortality. The beginningless Supreme Being is said 
to be neither eternal (Sat) nor temporal (Asat). (13.12) The Eternal 
Being has His hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth, and ears everywhere, because He is all-pervading and omnipresent. (13.13) He 
is the perceiver of all sense objects without the physical sense organs; unattached, and yet the sustainer of all; devoid of three 
modes of material Nature, and yet the enjoyer of the modes of material Nature by becoming a living entity. (13.14) He is inside as 
well as outside all beings, animate and inanimate. He is incomprehensible because of His subtlety. And because of His omnipresence, He is very near, residing in one’s inner psyche, as well as far 
away in His Supreme Abode. (13.15) He is undivided, and yet appears to exist as if divided in beings. He, the object of knowledge, 
appears as: Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the sustainer; and Shiva, 
the destroyer of all beings. (13.16) 
The Supreme Person is the source of all light. He is said to be 
beyond darkness of ignorance. He is the Self-knowledge, the object of Self-knowledge, and seated in the inner psyche as consciousness of all beings. He is to be realized by Self-knowledge. 
(13.17) Thus, the creation as well as the knowledge and the object 
of knowledge have been briefly described by Me. Understanding 
this, My devotee attains the supreme abode. (13.18)
A description of the supreme spirit, spirit, and jiva
Know that both the material Nature and the Spiritual Being are 
beginningless. All manifestations and three states of mind and matter, called modes or Gunas, are born of Prakriti. Prakriti is said to 
be the cause of production of the physical body and the eleven 
organs of perception and action. Purusha (Consciousness, Spirit) 
is said to be the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain. (13.19-
20) Purusha enjoys three modes of material Nature (Prakriti) by 
associating with Prakriti. Attachment to the Gunas due to ignorance caused by previous Karma is the cause of birth of living entity
(jiva) in good and evil wombs. (13.21) 
Eternal Being (God, Spirit) in the body is also called the witness, 
the guide, the supporter, the enjoyer, the great Lord, and also the 
Supreme Self. (13.22) They who truly understand Spiritual Being 
(Purusha) and the material Nature (Prakriti) with its three modes 
(Gunas) are not born again, regardless of their way of life. (13.23) 
Some perceive the supersoul in their inner psyche through mind 
and intellect that have been purified either by meditation or by metaphysical knowledge or by Karma-yoga. (13.24) 
The faith alone can lead to Nirvana
Others, however, do not know the yoga of meditation, 
knowledge, and work; but they perform deity worship with faith, as 
mentioned in the scriptures by the saints and sages. They also 
transcend death by virtue of their firm faith in what they have heard. 
(13.25) Whatever is born, animate or inanimate, know them to be 


born from the union of the matter and Spirit, O Arjuna. (13.26) 
The one who sees the same eternal Supreme Lord dwelling as 
Spirit equally within all mortal beings, truly sees. (13.27) Because 
of beholding one and the same Lord existing equally in every being, one does not injure anybody and thereupon attains the supreme abode. (13.28) One who perceives that all works are done 
by the powers (Gunas) of material Nature (Prakriti) alone, and thus 
does not consider oneself as the doer, that person truly understands. (13.29) The moment one discovers the diverse variety of 
beings and their ideas abiding in the Source and coming out from 
Him alone, one attains the Supreme Being. (13.30)
Attributes of the spirit 

Because of being beginningless and unaffectable by the three 
modes of material Nature, the eternal supersoul — even though 
dwelling in the body as a living entity — neither does anything nor 
becomes tainted, O Arjuna. (13.31) Just as the all-pervading space 
is not tainted because of its subtlety; similarly, Spirit, abiding in all 
bodies, is not tainted. (13.32) Just as one sun illuminates the entire 
world; similarly, Eternal Being illumines or gives life to the entire 
creation, O Arjuna. (13.33) 
They attain the Supreme, who perceive the difference between 
body and spirit with the eye of Self-knowledge, and know the techniques — by using any one of the five paths: Selfless service, 
Knowledge, Devotion, Meditation, and Surrender — of liberation of 
the living entity (Jiva) from the trap of divine illusory energy (Maya). 
(13.34)
CHAPTER 14
14. Three modes (Gunas) of nature
The Supreme Lord said: I shall further explain to you that supreme knowledge, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the 
sages have attained supreme perfection after this life. (14.01) They 
who have taken refuge in this spiritual knowledge attain unity with 
Me and are neither born at the time of creation, nor afflicted at the 
time of dissolution. (14.02) 
Beings are born from the union of spirit and matter
My material Nature is the womb of creation wherein I place the 
seed of consciousness from which all beings are born, O Arjuna. 
(14.03) Whatever forms are produced in all different wombs, O Arjuna, the material Nature is their body-giving mother; and I am the 
life-giving father. (14.04)
How three modes of material nature bind us
Sattva or goodness; Rajas or passion, activity; and Tamas or 
ignorance, inertia — these three modes (Ropes, Gunas) of material Nature (Prakriti) fetter the eternal individual soul to the body, O 
Arjuna. (14.05) Of these, the mode of goodness is illuminating and 
good because it is pure. It fetters the living entity by attachment to 
happiness and knowledge, O sinless Arjuna. (14.06) Know that the 
mode of passion is characterized by intense craving and is the 
source of desire and attachment. It binds the living entity by attachment to the fruits of work. (14.07) Know, O Arjuna, that the mode 
of ignorance — the deluder of living entity — is born of inertia. It 
binds the living entity by carelessness, laziness, and excessive 
sleep. (14.08) O Arjuna, the mode of goodness attaches one to 
happiness (of learning and knowing the Eternal Being); the mode 
of passion attaches to intense action; and the mode of ignorance 
attaches to inaction, laziness by covering Self-knowledge. (14.09) 
Characteristics of three modes of nature
Goodness prevails by suppressing passion and ignorance; 
passion prevails by suppressing goodness and ignorance; and ignorance prevails by suppressing goodness and passion, O Arjuna. 
(14.10) When the light of Self-knowledge illuminates all the senses 
in the body, then it should be known that goodness is predominant. 
(14.11) O Arjuna, when passion is predominant, greed, activity, undertaking of selfish work, restlessness, excitement, etc. arise. 
(14.12) O Arjuna, when inertia is predominant, ignorance, inactivity, carelessness, delusion, etc. arise. (14.13) 
Three modes are also the vehicles of transmigration 
One who dies when goodness dominates goes to heaven —
the pure world of knowers of the Supreme. (14.14) One who dies 
when passion dominates is reborn attached to action or the utilitarian type. One who dies in ignorance is reborn as a lower creature. 
(14.15) The fruit of good action is said to be beneficial and pure; 
the fruit of passionate action is pain; and the fruit of ignorant action 
is laziness. (14.16) Self-knowledge arises from the mode of goodness; greed arises from the mode of passion; and negligence, delusion, and slowness of mind arise from the mode of ignorance. 
(14.17) They who are established in goodness go to heaven; passionate persons are reborn in the mortal world; and the ignorant, 
abiding in the lowest mode of ignorance, go to lower planets or hell 
(or take birth as lower creatures). (14.18)
Attain Nirvana after rising above three modes 
When visionaries perceive no doer other than the three modes 
of material Nature and know the Supreme, which is above and beyond these modes, then they attain salvation (Mukti). (14.19) When
one rises above the three modes of material Nature that originate 
in the body, one attains immortality or salvation (Mukti) and is freed 
from the pains of birth, old age, and death. (14.20)
The process of rising above three modes
Arjuna said: What are the marks of those who have transcended the three modes of material Nature, and what is their 

conduct? How does one transcend these three modes of material Nature, O Lord Krishna? (14.21) The Supreme Lord said: One is said 
to have transcended the modes of material Nature who neither 
hates the presence of enlightenment, activity, and delusion; nor 
desires for them when they are absent; who remains like a witness 
without being affected by the modes of material Nature; who stays 
firmly attached to the Lord without wavering — thinking that only 
the modes of material Nature are operating. (14.22-23) And one 
who depends on the Lord and is indifferent to pain and pleasure; 
to whom a clod, a stone, and gold are alike; to whom the dear and 
the unfriendly are alike; who is of firm mind; who is calm in censure 

and in praise, and indifferent to honor and disgrace; who is impartial to friend and foe; and who has given up the sense of doership
and ownership. (14.24-25)
Bonds of three modes can be cut by devotional love
One who offers service to Me with love and unswerving devotion, rises above three modes of material Nature and becomes fit 
for Nirvana. (14.26) Because I am the basis of the immortal Eternal 
Being, of everlasting order (Dharma), and of the absolute bliss. 
(14.27)
CHAPTER 15
15. The supreme being
Creation is like a tree created by of Maya
The Supreme Lord said: Sages speak of the eternal banyan 
tree that has its origin (or root) above in the Supreme Being and 
branches below in the cosmos, and whose leaves are the Vedic 
hymns. One who understands this tree is a knower of the Vedas. 
(15.01) The branches of this cosmic tree of Maya (Illusion) spread 
all over the cosmos. The tree is nourished by three modes of material Nature; sense pleasures are its sprouts; and its roots of ego, 
attachment and desire stretch below in the human world, causing 
Karmic bondage. (15.02) 
Cut the tree of attachment to attain salvation
The real form of this tree is not perceptible here on earth, nor 
is its beginning, end, or existence. Having cut the firm roots — the 
ego and desires — of this tree by the mighty ax of Self-knowledge 
and detachment; thus thinking: "I take refuge in that very primal 
person from whom this primal manifestation comes forth", seek 
that supreme abode from where one does not come back to the 
mortal world again. (15.03-04) The wise reach that eternal goal, 
who are free from pride and delusion, who have conquered the evil 
of attachment, who constantly dwell in the Supreme Self with all 
desires completely stilled, and who are free from dualities of pleasure and pain. (15.05) The sun does not illumine My supreme 
abode, nor does the moon, nor the fire. Having reached there people attain permanent liberation (Mukti) and do not come back to 
this temporal world again. (15.06) 
The embodied soul is the enjoyer
The eternal individual soul in the body of living beings is, indeed, My integral part. It associates with the six sensory faculties 
of perception — including the mind — and activates them. (15.07) 
Just as the air takes aroma away from the flower; similarly, the individual soul takes the six sensory faculties from the physical body 
it casts off during death to the new physical body it acquires in reincarnation by the power of Karma. (15.08) The living entity (Jiva) 
enjoys sense pleasures using six sensory faculties of hearing, 
touch, sight, taste, smell, and mind. The ignorant cannot perceive 
Jiva departing from the body, nor staying in the body and enjoying 
sense pleasures by associating with the modes of material Nature. 
But those who have the eye of Self-knowledge can see it. (15.09-
10) The yogis, striving for perfection, behold the living entity (Jiva) 
abiding in their inner psyche as consciousness, but the ignorant 
and those whose inner psyche is not pure, even though striving, 
do not perceive Him. (15.11)
Spirit is the essence of everything
Know that light energy to be Mine that comes from the sun and 
illumines the whole world and is in the moon and in fire. (15.12) 
NOTE: The light of the sun is a reflection of His radiance (RV 
10.07.03). The knowers of the Supreme Being visualize 
everywhere — in themselves, in every human being, and in the 
whole universe — that supreme cluster of light which is the source 
of the visible world. 
Entering the earth, I support all beings with My energy. Becoming the sap-giving moon, I nourish all the plants. (15.13) Becoming 
the digestive fire, I remain in the body of all living beings. Uniting 
with vital life forces, I digest all types of food. (15.14) And I am 
seated in the inner psyche of all beings. Memory, Self-knowledge, 
and removal of doubts and wrong notions (about the Eternal Being 
by reasoning or in trance (Samadhi)) come from Me. I am to be 
known by the study of all the Vedas. I am, indeed, the author of the 
Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas. (15.15)
Supreme spirit, spirit and the created beings
There are two entities in the cosmos: The temporal Divine Beings and the unchangeable Eternal Being. All created beings are 
subject to change, but the Eternal Being does not change. (15.16) 
The Supreme Being is beyond both the Temporal Divine Beings 
and the Eternal Being. He is also called the Absolute, Reality, God, 


the Source, who sustains both the Temporal and the Eternal by 
pervading everything. (15.17) Because I am beyond both the Temporal and the Eternal, therefore I am known in this world and in the 
Vedas as the Supreme Being. (15.18) The wise, who truly understand Me as the Supreme Being, know everything and worship Me 
wholeheartedly, O Arjuna. (15.19) Thus, I have explained this most 
secret science of Self-knowledge, O sinless Arjuna. Having understood this, one becomes enlightened; one’s all duties are accomplished; and the goal of human life is achieved, O Arjuna. (15.20) 
CHAPTER 16
16. Divine and the demonic qualities
A list of divine qualities to be cultivated

The Supreme Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of the inner psyche, perseverance in the yoga of Self-knowledge, charity, senserestraint, sacrifice, study of the scriptures, austerity, honesty; nonviolence, truthfulness, absence of anger, renunciation, calmness, 
abstinence from malicious talk, compassion for all creatures, freedom from greed, gentleness, modesty, absence of fickleness, 
splendor, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, absence of malice, 
and absence of pride — these are the (twenty-six) qualities of 
those endowed with divine virtues, O Arjuna. (16.01-03)
A list of demonic qualities to be given up
O Arjuna, the marks of those who are born with demonic qualities are: Hypocrisy, arrogance, pride, anger, harshness, and ignorance. (16.04) Divine qualities lead to salvation (Moksha); the demonic qualities are said to be for bondage. Do not grieve, O Arjuna; 
you are born with divine qualities. (16.05) 
There are only two types of human beings
Basically, there are only two types of human beings in this 
world: The divine, and the demonic. The divine has been described 
at length. Now hear from Me about the demonic, O Arjuna. (16.06) 
Persons of demonic nature do not know what to do and what not 
to do. They have neither purity nor good conduct nor truthfulness. 
(16.07) They say that the world is unreal, without a substratum, 
without God, and without an order. The world is caused by sexual 
union of man and woman alone and nothing else. (16.08) Adhering 
to this wrong, atheistic view, these degraded souls — with small 
intellect and cruel deeds — are born as enemies for the destruction 
of the world. (16.09) Filled with insatiable desires, hypocrisy, pride, 
and arrogance; holding wrong views due to delusion; they act with 
impure motives, (16.10) obsessed with endless anxiety lasting until 
death, considering sense gratification their highest aim, and convinced that sense pleasure is everything; (16.11) 
Bound by hundreds of ties of desire and enslaved by lust and 
anger, they strive to obtain wealth by unlawful means to fulfill sensual pleasures. They think: (16.12) This has been gained by me 
today; I shall fulfill this desire; I have this much wealth and will have 
more wealth in the future; (16.13) that enemy has been slain by 
me, and I shall slay others also. I am the lord. I am the enjoyer. I 
am successful, powerful, and happy; (16.14)
I am rich and born in a noble family. Who is equal to me? I shall 
perform sacrifice, I shall give charity, and I shall rejoice. (16.15) 
Thus deluded by ignorance, bewildered by many fancies, entangled in the net of delusion, addicted to the enjoyment of sensual 
pleasures, they fall into a foul hell. (16.16) Self-conceited, stubborn, filled with pride and intoxication of wealth, they perform sacrifice, charity, etc. only in name for show, and not according to 
scriptural injunction. (16.17) These malicious people cling to egoism, power, arrogance, lust, anger, greed, hatred; and they deny 
My presence in their own body and in others’ bodies. (16.18) 
Suffering is the destiny of the ignorant
I hurl these haters, cruel, sinful, and mean people into the cycles of rebirth in the womb of demons again and again. (16.19) O 
Arjuna, entering the wombs of demons, birth after birth, the deluded ones sink to the lowest hell without ever attaining Me. (16.20)
Lust, anger, and greed are the three gates to hell
Lust, anger, and greed are the three gates of hell leading to the 
bondage of the individual. Therefore, one must learn to give up 
these three. (16.21) One who is liberated from these three gates of 
hell, O Arjuna, does what is best and consequently attains the supreme abode. (16.22) 
One must follow the scripture
One who acts under the influence of one’s desires, disobeying 
scriptural injunctions, neither attains perfection nor happiness nor 
the supreme abode. (16.23) Therefore, let the scripture be your 
authority in determining what should be done and what should not 
be done. You should perform your duty following the scriptural injunction. (16.24) 
CHAPTER 17
17. Threefold faith
Arjuna said: What is the mode of devotion of those who perform 
spiritual practices with faith, but without following the scriptural injunctions, O Krishna? Is it in the mode of goodness, passion, or 
ignorance? (17.01) 
Three types of faith
The Supreme Lord said: The natural faith of embodied beings 
is of three kinds: Goodness, passion, and ignorance. Now hear 
about these from Me. (17.02) O Arjuna, the faith of each is in accordance with one’s own natural disposition governed by Karmic 
impressions. One is known by one’s faith. One can become whatever one wants to be — if one constantly contemplates the object 
of desire with faith. (17.03) Persons in the mode of goodness worship celestial controllers; those in the mode of 

passion worship supernatural rulers and demons; and those in the mode of ignorance 
worship ghosts and spirits. (17.04) Ignorant persons of demonic 
nature are those who practice severe austerities without following 
the prescription of the scriptures, who are full of hypocrisy and egotism, who are impelled by the force of desire and attachment, and 
who senselessly torture the elements in their body and also Me 
who dwells within the body. (17.05-06)
Three types of food
The food preferred by all of us is also of three types. So are the 
sacrifice, austerity, and charity. Now hear the distinction between 

them. (17.07) The foods that promote longevity, virtue, strength, 
health, happiness, and joy are juicy, smooth, substantial, and nutritious. Such foods are liked by persons in the mode of goodness. 
(17.08) People in the mode of passion like foods that are very bitter, sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry, and burning; and cause pain, 
grief, and disease. (17.09) People in the mode of ignorance like 
foods that are stale, tasteless, putrid, rotten, refuse, impure, such 
as meat and alcohol. (17.10)
Three types of sacrifices
Selfless service — enjoined by the scriptures and performed 
without a desire for the fruit, with a firm belief and conviction that it 
is one’s duty — is in the mode of goodness. (17.11) Selfless service that is performed only for show and aiming for fruit — is in the 
mode of passion, O Arjuna. (17.12) Selfless service that is performed without following the scripture, in which no food is distributed, which is devoid of mantra, faith, and gift, is said to be in the 
mode of ignorance. (17.13)
Austerity of thought, word, and deed
The worship of celestial controllers, the priest, the guru, and 
the wise; purity, honesty, celibacy, and nonviolence — these are 
said to be austerity of deed. (17.14) Speech that is non-offensive, 
truthful, pleasant, beneficial, and is used for the regular study of 
scriptures is called the austerity of word. (17.15) Serenity of mind, 
gentleness, calmness, self-control, and purity of thought — these 
are called austerity of thought. (17.16) 
Three types of austerity
The above mentioned threefold austerity — of thought, word, 
and deed — practiced by yogis with supreme faith, without a desire 
for the fruit, is said to be in the mode of goodness. (17.17) Austerity 
that is performed for gaining respect, honor, reverence, and for the 
sake of show, yielding an uncertain and temporary result, is said to 
be in the mode of passion. (17.18) Austerity performed with foolish 
stubbornness or with self-torture or for harming others, is said to 
be in the mode of ignorance. (17.19)
Three types of charity
Charity that is given at the right place and time as a matter of 
duty to a deserving candidate who does nothing in return, is considered to be in the mode of goodness. (17.20) Charity that is given 
unwillingly, or to get something in return, or to gain some fruit, is 
said to be in the mode of passion. (17.21) Charity that is given at a 
wrong place and time to unworthy persons, or without paying respect to the receiver or with ridicule, is said to be in the mode of 
ignorance. (17.22)
Threefold name of God
‘OM TAT SAT’ is said to be the threefold name of God in Sanskrit. Persons with good qualities, the Vedas, and selfless service 
were created by God in the ancient time. (17.23) Therefore, acts of 
sacrifice, charity, and austerity prescribed in the scriptures are always commenced by uttering ‘OM’ by the knowers of the Supreme 
Being. (17.24) Various types of sacrifice, charity, and austerity are 
performed by the seekers of salvation by uttering ‘TAT’ (or He is 
all) without seeking a reward. (17.25) The word ‘SAT’ is used in the 
sense of Reality and goodness. The word ‘SAT’ is also used for an 
auspicious act, O Arjuna. (17.26) Faith in sacrifice, charity, and 
austerity is also called ‘SAT’. Selfless service for the sake of the 
Supreme is, in truth, termed as ‘SAT’. (17.27) Whatever is done 
without faith — whether it is sacrifice, charity, austerity, or any 
other act — is called ‘ASAT’. It has no value here or hereafter, O 
Arjuna. (17.28)
CHAPTER 18
18. Attaining liberation by giving up ego
Arjuna said: I wish to know the nature of renunciation 
(Samnyasa) and sacrifice (Tyaga) and the difference between the 
two, O Lord Krishna. (18.01) 
Definition of renunciation and sacrifice
The Supreme Lord said: The sages call renunciation the complete renunciation of work for any personal profit. The wise define 
sacrifice as the sacrifice of, and the freedom from, attachment to 
the fruits of all work. (18.02) Some philosophers say that all work 
is full of faults and should be given up, while others say that acts 
of sacrifice, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned. 
(18.03) 
O Arjuna, listen to My conclusion about sacrifice. Sacrifice is 
said to be of three types. (18.04) Acts of service, charity, and austerity should not be abandoned, but should be performed, because 
service, charity, and austerity are the purifiers of the wise. (18.05) 
Even these obligatory works should be performed without attachment to the fruits. This is My definite supreme advice, O Arjuna.
(18.06) 


Three types of sacrifice
Giving up one's duty is not proper. The abandonment of obligatory work is due to delusion and is declared to be in the mode of 
ignorance. (18.07) One who abandons duty merely because it is 
difficult or because of fear of bodily affliction, does not get the benefits of sacrifice by performing such a sacrifice in the mode of passion. (18.08) Obligatory work performed as duty, renouncing attachment to the fruit, is alone to be regarded as sacrifice in the 
mode of goodness, O Arjuna. (18.09) One who neither hates a disagreeable work, nor is attached to an agreeable work, is considered a sacrificer (Tyagi), imbued with the mode of goodness, intelligent, and free from all doubts about the Supreme Being. (18.10) 
Human beings cannot completely abstain from work. Therefore, 

one who completely renounces attachment to the fruits of all work 
is considered a Tyagi. (18.11) The threefold fruit of works — desirable, undesirable, and mixed — accrues after death to the one who 
is not a Tyagi, but never to a Tyagi. (18.12)
Five causes of an action
Learn from Me, O Arjuna, the five causes, as described in the 
Samkhya doctrine, for the accomplishment of all actions. They are: 
the physical body, the seat of Karma; the modes of material Nature, the doer; the eleven organs of perception and action, the instruments; various life forces; and the fifth is one’s fate. (18.13-14) 
These are the five causes of whatever action, whether right or 
wrong, one performs by thought, word and deed. (18.15) Therefore, the ignorant, who consider one’s body or the soul as the sole 
agent, do not understand due to imperfect knowledge. (18.16) One 
who is free from the notion of doership and whose intellect is not 
polluted by the desire to reap the fruit — even after slaying all these 
people — neither slays nor is bound by the act of killing. (18.17) 
The subject, the object, and the knowledge of the object are the 
threefold driving force (or impetus) to an action. The eleven organs 
of perception and action, the act, and the modes of Nature are the 
three components of action. (18.18)
Three types of spiritual knowledge
Self-knowledge, action, and agent are said to be of three types, 
according to the Guna theory. Hear duly about these also. (18.19) 
The knowledge by which one sees a single immutable Reality in all 
beings as undivided in the divided, such knowledge is in the mode 
of goodness. (18.20) The knowledge by which one sees different 
realities of various types among all beings as separate from one 
another; such knowledge is in the mode of passion. (18.21) The 
irrational, baseless, and worthless knowledge by which one clings 
to one single effect, such as the body, as if it is everything, such 
knowledge is declared to be in the mode of darkness or ignorance 
(18.22)
Three types of action
Obligatory duty, performed without likes and dislikes and without selfish motives and attachment to enjoy the fruit, is said to be 
in the mode of goodness. (18.23) Action performed with ego, with 
selfish motives, and with too much effort, is in the mode of passion. 
(18.24) Action that is undertaken because of delusion, disregarding consequences, loss, injury to others, as well as one’s own ability, is said to be in the mode of ignorance. (18.25)
Three types of person
A person who is free from attachment, is non-egotistic, endowed with resolve and enthusiasm, and unperturbed in success 
or failure, is called good. (18.26) A person who is impassioned, 
who desires the fruits of work, who is greedy, violent, impure, and 
gets affected by joy and sorrow, is called passionate. (18.27) A 
person who is undisciplined, vulgar, stubborn, wicked, malicious, 
lazy, depressed, and procrastinating, is called ignorant. (18.28)
Three types of intellect
Now hear Me explain fully and separately, O Arjuna, the threefold division of intellect and resolve, based on modes of material 
Nature. (18.29) O Arjuna, that intellect is in the mode of goodness 
which understands the path of work and the path of renunciation, 
right and wrong action, fear and fearlessness, bondage and liberation. (18.30) That intellect is in the mode of passion which cannot 
distinguish between righteousness and unrighteousness, and right 
and wrong action, O Arjuna. (18.31) That intellect is in the mode of 
ignorance which, when covered by ignorance, accepts unrighteousness as righteousness and thinks everything to be that which 
it is not, O Arjuna. (18.32) 
Three types of resolve, four goals of human life
That resolve is in the mode of goodness by which one manipulates the functions of the mind, Prana (bioimpulses, life forces) 
and senses for God-realization only, O Arjuna. (18.33) That resolve 
is in the mode of passion by which one, craving for the fruits of 
work, clings to duty, earning wealth, and pleasure with great attachment. (18.34) That resolve is in the mode of ignorance by 
which a dull person does not give up sleep, fear, grief, despair, and 
carelessness, O Arjuna. (18.35)
Three types of pleasure
And now hear from Me, O Arjuna, about the threefold pleasure. 
The pleasure that one enjoys from spiritual practice results in cessation of all sorrows. (18.36) The pleasure that appears as poison 
in the beginning, but is like nectar in the end, comes by the grace 
of Self-knowledge and is in the mode of goodness. (18.37) Sensual 
pleasures that appear as nectars in the beginning, but become poison in the end, are in the mode of passion. (18.38) Pleasure that 
confuses a person in the beginning and in the end as a result of 
sleep, laziness, and carelessness, is in the mode of ignorance. 
(18.39) There is no being, either on the earth or among the celestial 
controllers in the heaven, who can remain free from these three 


modes of material Nature. (18.40) 
Division of labor is based on one’s ability
The division of labor into four categories is also based on the 
qualities inherent in people’s nature and not necessarily as one’s 
birth right, O Arjuna. (18.41) Intellectuals who have serenity, selfcontrol, austerity, purity, patience, honesty, spiritual knowledge, 
spiritual experience, and belief in God are labeled as intellectuals 
(Brahmans). (18.42) Those having the qualities of heroism, vigor, 
firmness, dexterity, steadfastness in battle, charity, and administrative skills are called Kshatriyas or warriors. (18.43) Those who 

are good at cultivation, cattle rearing, business, trade, and industry 
are known as Vaishyas (merchants). Those who are very good in 
service and labor type work are classed as laborers. (18.44)
Attain salvation by duty, discipline, devotion
One can attain the highest perfection by devotion to one’s natural work. Listen to Me how one attains perfection while engaged 
in one’s natural work. (18.45) One attains perfection by worshipping the Supreme Being—from whom all beings originate, and by 
whom all this universe is pervaded — through performance of 
one’s natural duty for Him. (18.46) One’s inferior natural work is 
better than superior unnatural work even though well performed. 
One who does the work ordained by one’s inherent nature without 
selfish motives incurs no sin or Karmic bondage. (18.47) One’s 
natural work, even though defective, should not be abandoned because all undertakings are enveloped by defects as fire is covered 
by smoke, O Arjuna. (18.48) The person whose mind is always free 
from attachment, who has subdued the mind and senses, and who 
is free from desires, attains the supreme perfection of freedom 
from the bondage of Karma by renouncing attachment to the fruits 
of work. (18.49) 
Learn from Me briefly, O Arjuna, how one who has attained such 
perfection — the freedom from the bondage of Karma — attains 
the Supreme Person, the goal of spiritual knowledge. (18.50) Endowed with purified intellect, subduing the mind with firm resolve, 
turning away from sound and other objects of the senses, giving 
up likes and dislikes; living in solitude; eating lightly; controlling the 
mind, speech, and organs of action; ever absorbed in yoga of meditation; taking refuge in detachment; and relinquishing egotism, violence, pride, lust, anger, and proprietorship — one becomes 
peaceful, free from the notion of "I” and “my", and fit for attaining 
oneness with the Supreme Being. (18.51-53) Absorbed in the Supreme Being, the serene one neither grieves nor desires. Becoming impartial to all beings, one obtains My Para-Bhakti, the highest 
devotional love. (18.54) By devotion one truly understands what 
and who I am in essence. Having known Me in essence, one immediately merges with Me. (18.55) 
A Karma-yogi attains the eternal immutable abode, by My grace 
— even while doing all duties — just by dedicating all action to Me 
with loving devotion. (18.56) Sincerely offer all actions to Me, set 
Me as your supreme goal, and completely depend on Me. Always 
fix your mind on Me and resort to Karma-yoga. (18.57) When your 
mind becomes fixed on Me, you shall overcome all difficulties by 
My grace. But, if you do not listen to Me due to ego, you shall perish. (18.58)
Karmic bondage and the free will
If due to ego you think: I shall not fight, your resolve is vain. 
Because your own nature will compel you to fight. (18.59) O Arjuna, you are controlled by your own nature-born Karmic impressions (or Samskara). Therefore, you shall do — even against your 
will — what you do not wish to do out of delusion. (18.60) The Supreme Lord, Krishna or God, abiding as the controller in the inner 
psyche of all beings, O Arjuna, causes them to evolve — or work 
out their Karma — like a puppet of Karma, mounted on a machine. 
(18.61) 
The Supreme Controller is the reflection of the Supreme 
Spirit in the body. The Supreme Lord organizes, controls, 
supervises, and directs everything in the universe. Human being is 
like a puppet of Karma mounted on a body which is the vehicle of 
transmigration. The word evolve refers to working out one’s Karma. 
Thus we become the puppet of our own Karma created by our free 
will. 
The Lord has made Karmic laws as the controller of all 
living beings. Therefore, one must learn to gladly endure all that 
fate imposes by taking refuge in God and following His
commandments. Vedas declare that the Lord, using His law of 
Karma, makes us dance as a juggler would make his monkey 
dance. Without the laws of Karma; the scriptural injunctions, 
prohibitions, as well as self-effort, would have no value at all. 
Karma is the eternal justice and the eternal law. As a result of the 
working of eternal justice, there can be no escape from the consequences of our deeds. We become the product of our own past 
thinking and action. Therefore, we must think and act wisely at the 
present moment, using the scriptures as a guide. 
The doctrine of Karma and reincarnation is also found in 
the following two verses of the Koran: Allah is He who created you 
and then sustained you, then causes you to die, then gives life to 
you again (Surah 30.40). He may reward those who believe and 
do good works. No one is able to escape His law of consequences 
(Surah 30.45). People cannot escape from the consequences of 
their deeds, for as we sow, so we reap. Cause and effect cannot 


be separated because the effect exists in the cause as the fruit 
exists in the seed. Good and evil deeds follow us continually like 
our shadows. 
The Bible also says: Whosoever shedeth man’s blood, by 
man shall his blood be shed (Genesis 9.06). It is believed that all 
references to Karma and reincarnation were taken out of the Bible 
during the second century with the noble aim of encouraging 
people to strive hard for perfection during this very life. Those who 
believe in reincarnation must avoid laziness and procrastination, 
stress intense spiritual discipline, and try their best to get Self-

realization in this very life as if there were no reincarnation. Live as 
though this is your last day on this earth. One cannot achieve 
anything through laziness and procrastination. 
Seek refuge in the Supreme Lord alone with loving devotion, O 
Arjuna. By His grace you shall attain supreme peace and the Eternal Abode. (18.62) Thus, I have explained the knowledge that is 
more secret than the secret. After fully reflecting on this, do as you 
wish. (18.63) 
Path of surrender is the ultimate path to God
Hear once again My most secret, supreme word. You are very 
dear to Me; therefore, I shall tell this for your benefit. (18.64) Fix 
your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, offer service to Me, bow down 
to Me, and you shall certainly reach Me. I promise you, because 
you are My very dear friend. (18.65) Setting aside doership, ownership and attachment to the fruits of all works, just surrender to—
or gladly abide by— My Will. I shall liberate you from all sins or 
bondage of Karma. Do not grieve. (18.66) 
The meaning of abandoning all duties and taking refuge in 
God is that one should perform duty without ego and attachment
to results; as an offering to the Lord, and totally depend only on 
Him. The Lord takes full responsibility for a person who totally depends on Him and understands: All is manifestation of the One.
The highest service to God, and the best charity
This knowledge should never be spoken by you to one who is 
devoid of austerity, who is without devotion, who does not desire 
to listen, or who speaks ill of Me. (18.67) 
To speak of wisdom to a deluded person, to glorify sacrifice to 
a greedy person, to advise sense control to an irascible person, 
and to discourse on Lord Rama’s exploits to a lecher, is as useless 
as sowing seed on barren ground. It is not for any soul to believe, 
save by the permission of Allah. You should not compel one to 
believe (Surah 10.100-101). Anyone to whom Allah has not 
granted the light (of knowledge) will have no light (Surah 24.40).
The study of Gita or any other scripture is meant only for sincere 
persons. According to Ramakrishna, one can understand Him as 
much as He makes one understand. Guru Nanak said: O Beloved; 
only they to whom You give the divine knowledge, obtain it.
The one who shall propagate (or help the propagation of) this 
supreme secret philosophy of the Gita amongst devotees, shall be 
performing the highest devotional service to Me and shall certainly 
come to Me. (18.68) No other person shall do a more pleasing service to Me, and no one on the earth shall be dearer to Me. (18.69)
The Grace of the Gita
Those who shall study our sacred dialogue shall be performing 
a holy act of knowledge-sacrifice. This is My promise. (18.70) Whoever hears or reads this sacred dialogue in the form of the Gita with 
faith and without cavil becomes free from sin, and attains heaven 
— the higher worlds of those whose actions are pure and virtuous. 
(18.71) O Arjuna, did you listen to this with single-minded attention? Has your delusion born of ignorance been completely destroyed? (18.72) Arjuna said: By Your Grace my delusion is destroyed; I have gained Self-knowledge; my confusion with regard 
to body and Spirit is dispelled; and I shall obey Your command. 
(18.73) 
Sanjaya said: Thus, I heard this wonderful dialogue between 
Lord Krishna and Arjuna, causing my hair to stand on end. (18.74) 
By the grace of guru sage Vyasa, I heard this most secret and supreme yoga directly from Krishna, the Lord of yoga, Himself speaking to Arjuna before my very eyes of clairvoyance granted by sage 
Vyasa. (18.75) O King, by repeated remembrance of this marvelous and sacred dialogue between Lord Krishna and Arjuna, I am 
thrilled at every moment, and (18.76) recollecting again and again, 
O King, that marvelous form of Krishna I am greatly amazed, and 
I rejoice over and over again. (18.77) 
Both spiritual knowledge and action are needed
Wherever there will be both Krishna, the Lord of yoga (or 
Dharma in the form of the scriptures) and Arjuna with the weapons 
of duty and protection, there will be everlasting prosperity, victory, 
happiness, and morality. This is my conviction. (18.78)
Thus ends the Bhagavad-Gita
This book is offered to the Lord of the Universe
May He bless us all with Goodness.